Hands-On Network Programming with C




Learn socket programming in C and write secure and optimized network code




Lewis Van Winkle
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
Hands-On Network Programming
with C
Copyright © 2019 Packt Publishing

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.

Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information presented. However, the
information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing or its
dealers and distributors, will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book.

Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and products mentioned in this book by
the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.




Commissioning Editor: Richa Tripathi
Acquisition Editor: Shriram Shekhar
Content Development Editor: Digvijay Bagul
Technical Editor: Abin Sebastian
Copy Editor: Safis Editing
Project Coordinator: Prajakta Naik
Proofreader: Safis Editing
Indexer: Tejal Daruwale Soni
Graphics Coordinator: Tom Scaria
Production Coordinator: Aparna Bhagat

First published: May 2019

Production reference: 1100519

Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham
B3 2PB, UK.




ISBN 978-1-78934-986-3




www.packtpub.com
For Doogie
             – Lewis Van Winkle
mapt.io


Mapt is an online digital library that gives you full access to over 5,000 books
and videos, as well as industry leading tools to help you plan your personal
development and advance your career. For more information, please visit our
website.
Why subscribe?
  Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks and
  Videos from over 4,000 industry professionals

  Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you

  Get a free eBook or video every month

  Mapt is fully searchable

  Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
Packt.com
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with
PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.packt.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook

copy. Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.com for more details.

At www.packt.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up
for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on
Packt books and eBooks.
Contributors
About the author
Lewis Van Winkle is a software programming consultant, entrepreneur, and
founder of a successful IoT company. He has over 20 years of programming
experience after publishing his first successful software product at the age of 12.
He has over 15 years of programming experience with the C programming
language on a variety of operating systems and platforms. He is active in the
open source community and has published several popular open source programs
and libraries—many of them in C. Today, Lewis spends much of his time
consulting, where he loves taking on difficult projects that other programmers
have given up on. He specializes in network systems, financial systems, machine
learning, and interoperation between different programming languages.

I would like to thank the publisher, Packt. This book wouldn't exist without their encouragement and
backing. I would also like to extend a special thank you to my reviewer, Daniele Lacamera, for the careful
work he carried out. This book improved significantly as a result of his valuable feedback. I also want to
acknowledge the patience and support that my friends and family have shown over the last year while I've
been away writing.
About the reviewer
Daniele Lacamera is a software technologist and researcher with vast
experience in software design and development on embedded systems for
different industries. He is currently working as freelance software developer and
trainer. He is a worldwide expert in TCP/IP and transport protocol design and
optimization, with more than 20 academic publications on the topic. He supports
free software by contributing to several projects, including the Linux kernel, and
is involved within a number of communities and organizations that promote the
use of free and open source software in the IoT.
Packt is searching for authors like
you
If you're interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit authors.packtpub.c
om and apply today. We have worked with thousands of developers and tech

professionals, just like you, to help them share their insight with the global tech
community. You can make a general application, apply for a specific hot topic
that we are recruiting an author for, or submit your own idea.
Table of Contents
   Title Page
   Copyright and Credits
         Hands-On Network Programming with C
   Dedication
   About Packt
         Why subscribe?
         Packt.com
   Contributors
         About the author
         About the reviewer
         Packt is searching for authors like you
   Preface
         Who this book is for
         What this book covers
         To get the most out of this book
                 Download the example code files
                 Download the color images
               Conventions used
         Get in touch
                 Reviews
1. Section 1 - Getting Started with Network Programming
1. Introducing Networks and Protocols
         Technical requirements
         The internet and C
         OSI layer model
         TCP/IP layer model
         Data encapsulation
         Internet Protocol
                 What is an address?
         Domain names
         Internet routing
                 Local networks and address translation
                 Subnetting and CIDR
                 Multicast, broadcast, and anycast
         Port numbers
         Clients and servers
         Putting it together
         What's your address?
         Listing network adapters from C
              Listing network adapters on Windows
              Listing network adapters on Linux and macOS
         Summary
         Questions
2. Getting to Grips with Socket APIs
         Technical requirements
         What are sockets?
         Socket setup
         Two types of sockets
         Socket functions
         Anatomy of a socket program
              TCP program flow
               UDP program flow
         Berkeley sockets versus Winsock sockets
              Header files
              Socket data type
              Invalid sockets
              Closing sockets
               Error handling
         Our first program
              A motivating example
              Making it networked
              Working with IPv6
              Supporting both IPv4 and IPv6
              Networking with inetd
         Summary
         Questions
3. An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections
         Technical requirements
         Multiplexing TCP connections
              Polling non-blocking sockets
              Forking and multithreading
               The select() function
         Synchronous multiplexing with select()
              select() timeout
              Iterating through an fd_set
               select() on non-sockets
         A TCP client
               TCP client code
         A TCP server
              TCP server code
              Building a chat room
         Blocking on send()
         TCP is a stream protocol
         Summary
         Questions
4. Establishing UDP Connections
         Technical requirements
         How UDP sockets differ
              UDP client methods
               UDP server methods
         A first UDP client/server
              A simple UDP server
              A simple UDP client
         A UDP server
         Summary
         Questions
5. Hostname Resolution and DNS
         Technical requirements
         How hostname resolution works
              DNS record types
               DNS security
         Name/address translation functions
              Using getaddrinfo()
              Using getnameinfo()
              Alternative functions
               IP lookup example program
         The DNS protocol
              DNS message format
              DNS message header format
              Question format
              Answer format
              Endianness
               A simple DNS query
         A DNS query program
              Printing a DNS message name
              Printing a DNS message
              Sending the query
         Summary
         Questions
         Further reading
2. Section 2 - An Overview of Application Layer Protocols
6. Building a Simple Web Client
         Technical requirements
         The HTTP protocol
              HTTP request types
              HTTP request format
              HTTP response format
              HTTP response codes
               Response body length
         What's in a URL
              Parsing a URL
         Implementing a web client
         HTTP POST requests
              Encoding form data
              File uploads
         Summary
         Questions
         Further reading
7. Building a Simple Web Server
         Technical requirements
         The HTTP server
               The server architecture
         Content types
              Returning Content-Type from a filename
         Creating the server socket
         Multiple connections buffering
              get_client()
              drop_client()
              get_client_address()
              wait_on_clients()
              send_400()
              send_404()
              serve_resource()
         The main loop
         Security and robustness
              Open source servers
         Summary
         Questions
         Further reading
8. Making Your Program Send Email
         Technical requirements
         Email servers
               SMTP security
               Finding an email server
          SMTP dialog
          The&#xA0;format of an email
          A simple SMTP client program
          Enhanced emails
               Email file attachments
          Spam-blocking pitfalls
          Summary
          Questions
          Further reading
 3. Section 3 - Understanding Encrypted Protocols and OpenSSL
 9. Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL
          Technical requirements
          HTTPS overview
          Encryption basics
               Symmetric ciphers
               Asymmetric ciphers
                How TLS uses ciphers
          The TLS protocol
               Certificates
                Server name identification
          OpenSSL
               Encrypted sockets with OpenSSL
               Certificates
          A simple HTTPS client
          Other examples
          Summary
          Questions
          Further reading
10. Implementing a Secure Web Server
          Technical requirements
          HTTPS and OpenSSL summary
               Certificates
                Self-signed certificates with OpenSSL
          HTTPS server with OpenSSL
               Time server example
                A full HTTPS server
          HTTPS server challenges
               OpenSSL alternatives
               Alternatives to TLS
          Summary
          Questions
          Further reading
11. Establishing SSH Connections with libssh
          Technical requirements
          The SSH protocol
          libssh
               Testing out libssh
                Establishing a connection
          SSH authentication
               Server authentication
               Client authentication
          Executing a remote command
          Downloading a file
          Summary
          Questions
          Further reading
 4. Section 4 - Odds and Ends
12. Network Monitoring and Security
          Technical requirements
          The purpose of network monitoring
          Testing reachability
               Checking a route
               How traceroute works
               Raw sockets
          Checking local connections
          Snooping on connections
               Deep packet inspection
                Capturing all network traffic
          Network security
               Application security and safety
          Network-testing etiquette
          Summary
          Questions
          Further reading
13. Socket Programming Tips and Pitfalls
          Technical requirements
          Error handling
                Obtaining error descriptions
          TCP socket tips
               Timeout on connect()
               TCP flow control and avoiding deadlock
               Congestion control
               The Nagle algorithm
               Delayed acknowledgment
               Connection tear-down
               The shutdown() function
               Preventing address-in-use errors
               Sending to a disconnected peer
          Socket's local address
          Multiplexing with a large number of sockets
          Summary
          Questions
14. Web Programming for the Internet of Things
          Technical requirements
          What is the IoT?
          Connectivity options
               Wi-Fi
               Ethernet
               Cellular
               Bluetooth
                IEEE 802.15.4 WPANs
          Hardware choices
               Single-board computers
               Microcontrollers
               FPGAs
          External transceivers and modems
          IoT protocols
          Firmware updates
          Ethics of IoT
               Privacy and data collection
               End-of-life planning
               Security
          Summary
          Questions
    Answers to Questions
          Chapter 1, Introducing Networks and Protocols
          Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs
          Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections
          Chapter 4, Establishing UDP Connections
          Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and DNS
     Chapter 6, Building a Simple Web Client
     Chapter 7, Building a Simple Web Server
     Chapter 8, Making Your Program Send Email
     Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL
     Chapter 10, Implementing a Secure Web Server
     Chapter 11, Establishing SSH Connections with libssh
     Chapter 12, Network Monitoring and Security
     Chapter 13, Socket Programming Tips and Pitfalls
      Chapter 14, Web Programming for the Internet of Things
Setting Up Your C Compiler on Windows
     Installing MinGW GCC
     Installing Git
     Installing OpenSSL
     Installing libssh
      Alternatives
Setting Up Your C Compiler on Linux
     Installing GCC
     Installing Git
     Installing OpenSSL
      Installing libssh
Setting Up Your C Compiler on macOS
     Installing Homebrew and the C compiler
     Installing OpenSSL
      Installing libssh
Example Programs
     Code license
     Code included with this book
           Chapter 1 &#x2013; Introducing Networks and Protocols
           Chapter 2 &#x2013; Getting to Grips with Socket APIs
           Chapter 3 &#x2013; An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections
           Chapter 4 &#x2013; Establishing UDP Connections
           Chapter 5 &#x2013; Hostname Resolution and DNS
           Chapter 6 &#x2013; Building a Simple Web Client
           Chapter 7 &#x2013; Building a Simple Web Server
           Chapter 8 &#x2013; Making Your Program Send Email
           Chapter 9 &#x2013; Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL
           Chapter 10 &#x2013; Implementing a Secure Web Server
           Chapter 11 &#x2013; Establishing SSH Connections with libssh
           Chapter 12 &#x2013; Network Monitoring and Security
           Chapter 13 &#x2013; Socket Programming Tips and Pitfalls
           Chapter 14 &#x2013; Web Programming for the Internet of Things
Other Book You May Enjoy
     Leave a review - let other readers know what you think
Preface
Packt first contacted me about writing this book nearly a year ago. It's been a
long journey, harder than I anticipated at times, and I've learned a lot. The book
you hold now is the culmination of many long days, and I'm proud to finally
present it.

I think C is a beautiful programming language. No other language in everyday
use gets you as close to the machine as C does. I've used C to program 8-bit
microcontrollers with only 16 bytes of RAM, just the same as I've used it to
program modern desktops with multi-core, multi-GHz processors. It's truly
remarkable that C works efficiently in both contexts.

Network programming is a fun topic, but it's also a very deep one; a lot is going
on at many levels. Some programming languages hide these abstractions. In the
Python programming language, for example, you can download an entire web
page using only one line of code. This isn't the case in C! In C, if you want to
download a web page, you have to know how everything works. You need to
know sockets, you need to know Transfer Control Protocol (TCP), and you
need to know HTTP. In C network programming, nothing is hidden.

C is a great language to learn network programming in. This is not only because
we get to see all the details, but also because the popular operating systems all
use kernels written in C. No other language gives you the same first-class access
as C does. In C, everything is under your control – you can lay out your data
structures exactly how you want, manage memory precisely as you please, and
even shoot yourself in the foot just the way you want.

When I first began writing this book, I surveyed other resources related to
learning network programming with C. I found much misinformation – not only
on the web, but even in print. There is a lot of C networking code that is done
wrong. Internet tutorials about C sockets often use deprecated functions and
ignore memory safety completely. When it comes to network programming, you
can't take the it works so it's good enough programming-by-coincidence
approach. You have to use reasoning.
In this book, I take care to approach network programming in a modern and safe
way. The example programs are carefully designed to work with both IPv4 and
IPv6, and they are all written in a portable, operating system-independent way,
whenever possible. Wherever there is an opportunity for memory errors, I try to
take notice and point out these concerns. Security is too often left as an
afterthought. I believe security is important, and it should be planned in the
system from the beginning. Therefore, in addition to teaching network basics,
this book spends a lot of time working with secure protocols, such as TLS.

I hope you enjoy reading this book as much as I enjoyed writing it.
Who this book is for
This book is for the C or C++ programmer who wants to add networking
features to their software. It is also designed for the student or professional who
simply wants to learn about network programming and common network
protocols.

It is assumed that the reader already has some familiarity with the C
programming language. This includes a basic proficiency with pointers, basic
data structures, and manual memory management.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Introducing Networks and Protocols, introduces the important concepts
related to networking. This chapter includes example programs to determine
your IP address pragmatically.

       , Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, introduces socket programming
Chapter 2

APIs and has you build your first networked program—a tiny web server.

        , An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections, focuses on programming
Chapter 3

TCP sockets. In this chapter, example programs are developed for both the client
and server sides.

      , Establishing UDP Connections, covers programming with User
Chapter 4

Datagram Protocol (UDP) sockets.

Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and DNS, explains how hostnames are translated
into IP addresses. In this chapter, we build an example program to perform
manual DNS query lookups using UDP.

       , Building a Simple Web Client, introduces HTTP—the protocol that
Chapter 6
powers websites. We dive right in and build an HTTP client in C.

        , Building a Simple Web Server, describes how to construct a fully
Chapter 7

functional web server in C. This program is able to serve a static website to any
modern web browser.

       , Making Your Program Send Email, describes Simple Mail Transfer
Chapter 8
Protocol (SMTP)—the protocol that is powering email. In this chapter, we
develop a program that can send email over the internet.

Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL, explores TLS—
the protocol that secures web pages. In this chapter, we develop an HTTPS client
that is capable of downloading web pages securely.

Chapter 10  , Implementing a Secure Web Server, continues on the security theme
and explores the construction of a secure HTTPS web server.

         , Establishing SSH Connections with libssh, continues with the secure
Chapter 11

protocol theme. The use of Secure Shell (SSH) is covered to connect to a remote
server, execute commands, and download files securely.

         , Network Monitoring and Security, discusses the tools and techniques
Chapter 12

used to test network functionality, troubleshoot problems, and eavesdrop on
insecure communication protocols.

        , Socket Programming Tips and Pitfalls, goes into detail about TCP and
Chapter 13

addresses many important edge cases that appear in socket programming. The
techniques covered are invaluable for creating robust network programs.

         , Web Programming for the Internet of Things, gives an overview of the
Chapter 14

design and programming for Internet of Things (IoT) applications.

         , Answers to Questions, provides answers to the comprehension
Appendix A
questions given at the end of each chapter.

        , Setting Up Your C Compiler on Windows, gives instructions for setting
Appendix B

up a development environment on Windows that is needed for compiling all of
the example programs in this book.

         , Setting Up Your C Compiler on Linux, provides the setup instructions
Appendix C

for preparing your Linux computer to be capable of compiling all of the example
programs in this book.

         , Setting Up Your C Compiler on macOS, gives step-by-step instructions
Appendix D
for configuring your macOS system to be capable of compiling all of the
example programs in this book.

Appendix E, Example Programs, lists each example program, by chapter, included
in this book's code repository.
To get the most out of this book
The reader is expected to be proficient in the C programming language. This
includes a familiarity with memory management, the use of pointers, and basic
data structures.

A Windows, Linux, or macOS development machine is recommended; you can
refer to the appendices for setup instructions.

This book takes a hands-on approach to learning and includes 44 example
programs. Working through these examples as you read the book will help
enforce the concepts.

The code for this book is released under the MIT open source license. The reader
is encouraged to use, modify, improve, and even publish their changes to these
example programs.
Download the example code files
You can download the example code files for this book from your account at www.
packt.com. If you purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit www.packt.com/support

and register to have the files emailed directly to you.

The code bundle for the book is also publicly hosted on GitHub at https://github.c
om/codeplea/hands-on-network-programming-with-c. In case there's an update to the code,

it will be updated on that GitHub repository. Each chapter that introduces
example programs begins with the commands needed to download the book's
code.
Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams
used in this book. You can download it here: http://www.packtpub.com/sites/default/fi
les/downloads/9781789349863_ColorImages.pdf.
Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.

         : Indicates code words in text, variable names, function names,
CodeInText

directory names, filenames, file extensions, pathnames, URLs, and user input.
Here is an example: "Use the select() function to wait for network data."

A block of code is set as follows:
  /* example program */

  #include <stdio.h>
  int main() {
      printf("Hello World!\n");
      return 0;
  }


Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
  gcc hello.c -o hello
  ./hello


Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see on screen.
For example, words in menus or dialog boxes appear in the text like this. Here is
an example: "Select System info from the Administration panel."
Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.

General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, mention
the book title in the subject of your message and email us at
customercare@packtpub.com.


Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our
content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we would
be grateful if you would report this to us. Please visit www.packt.com/submit-errata,
selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form link, and entering
the details.

Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the
internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location address
or website name. Please contact us at copyright@packt.com with a link to the
material.

If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have
expertise in, and you are interested in either writing or contributing to a book,
please visit authors.packtpub.com.
Reviews
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not leave a
review on the site that you purchased it from? Potential readers can then see and
use your unbiased opinion to make purchase decisions, we at Packt can
understand what you think about our products, and our authors can see your
feedback on their book. Thank you!

For more information about Packt, please visit packt.com.
Section 1 - Getting Started with
Network Programming
This section will get the reader up and running with the basics of networking, the
relevant network protocols, and basic socket programming.

The following chapters are in this section:

        , An Introduction to Networks and Protocols
Chapter 1


        , Getting to Grips with Socket APIs
Chapter 2


        , An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections
Chapter 3


        , Establishing UDP Connections
Chapter 4


        , Hostname Resolution and DNS
Chapter 5
Introducing Networks and Protocols
In this chapter, we will review the fundamentals of computer networking. We'll
look at abstract models that attempt to explain the main concerns of networking,
and we'll explain the operation of the primary network protocol, the Internet
Protocol. We'll look at address families and end with writing programs to list
your computer's local IP addresses.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     Network programming and C
     OSI layer model
     TCP/IP reference model
     The Internet Protocol
     IPv4 addresses and IPv6 addresses
     Domain names
     Internet protocol routing
     Network address translation
     The client-server paradigm
     Listing your IP addresses programmatically from C
Technical requirements
Most of this chapter focuses on theory and concepts. However, we do introduce
some sample programs near the end. To compile these programs, you will need a
good C compiler. We recommend MinGW on Windows and GCC on Linux and
macOS. See Appendix B, Setting Up Your C Compiler On Windows, Appendix C,
Setting Up Your C Compiler On Linux, and Appendix D, Setting Up Your C
Compiler On macOS, for compiler setup.

The code for this book can be found at: https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-P
rogramming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap01


On Windows, using MinGW, you can use the following command to compile
and run code:
  gcc win_list.c -o win_list.exe -liphlpapi -lws2_32
  win_list


On Linux and macOS, you can use the following command:
  gcc unix_list.c -o unix_list
  ./unix_list
The internet and C
Today, the internet needs no introduction. Certainly, millions of desktops,
laptops, routers, and servers are connected to the internet and have been for
decades. However, billions of additional devices are now connected as well—
mobile phones, tablets, gaming systems, vehicles, refrigerators, television sets,
industrial machinery, surveillance systems, doorbells, and even light bulbs. The
new Internet of Things (IoT) trend has people rushing to connect even more
unlikely devices every day.

Over 20 billion devices are estimated to be connected to the internet now. These
devices use a wide variety of hardware. They connect over an Ethernet
connection, Wi-Fi, cellular, a phone line, fiber optics, and other media, but they
likely have one thing in common; they likely use C.

The use of the C programming language is ubiquitous. Almost every network
stack is programmed in C. This is true for Windows, Linux, and macOS. If your
mobile phone uses Android or iOS, then even though the apps for these were
programmed in a different language (Java and Objective C), the kernel and
networking code was written in C. It is very likely that the network routers that
your internet data goes through are programmed in C. Even if the user interface
and higher-level functions of your modem or router are programmed in another
language, the networking drivers are still probably implemented in C.

Networking encompasses concerns at many different abstraction levels. The
concerns your web browser has with formatting a web page are much different
than the concerns your router has with forwarding network packets. For this
reason, it is useful to have a theoretical model that helps us to understand
communications at these different levels of abstraction. Let's look at these
models now.
OSI layer model
It's clear that if all of the disparate devices composing the internet are going to
communicate seamlessly, there must be agreed-upon standards that define their
communications. These standards are called protocols. Protocols define
everything from the voltage levels on an Ethernet cable to how a JPEG image is
compressed on a web page. It's clear that, when we talk about the voltage on an
Ethernet cable, we are at a much different level of abstraction compared to
talking about the JPEG image format. If you're programming a website, you
don't want to think about Ethernet cables or Wi-Fi frequencies. Likewise, if
you're programming an internet router, you don't want to have to worry about
how JPEG images are compressed. For this reason, we break the problem down
into many smaller pieces.

One common method of breaking down the problem is to place levels of concern
into layers. Each layer then provides services for the layer on top of it, and each
upper layer can rely on the layers underneath it without concern for how they
work.

The most popular layer system for networking is called the Open Systems
Interconnection model (OSI model). It was standardized in 1977 and is
published as ISO 7498. It has seven layers:
Let's understand these layers one by one:

     Physical (1): This is the level of physical communication in the real world.
     At this level, we have specifications for things such as the voltage levels on
     an Ethernet cable, what each pin on a connector is for, the radio frequency
     of Wi-Fi, and the light flashes over an optic fiber.
     Data Link (2): This level builds on the physical layer. It deals with
     protocols for directly communicating between two nodes. It defines how a
     direct message between nodes starts and ends (framing), error detection and
     correction, and flow control.
     Network layer (3): The network layer provides the methods to transmit
     data sequences (called packets) between nodes in different networks. It
     provides methods to route packets from one node to another (without a
     direct physical connection) by transferring through many intermediate
     nodes. This is the layer that the Internet Protocol is defined on, which we
     will go into in some depth later.
     Transport layer (4): At this layer, we have methods to reliably deliver
     variable length data between hosts. These methods deal with splitting up
     data, recombining it, ensuring data arrives in order, and so on.
     The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol
     (UDP) are commonly said to exist on this layer.
     Session layer (5): This layer builds on the transport layer by adding
     methods to establish, checkpoint, suspend, resume, and terminate dialogs.
     Presentation layer (6): This is the lowest layer at which data structure and
     presentation for an application are defined. Concerns such as data encoding,
     serialization, and encryption are handled here.
     Application layer (7): The applications that the user interfaces with (for
     example, web browsers and email clients) exist here. These applications
     make use of the services provided by the six lower layers.

In the OSI model, an application, such as a web browser, exists in the application
layer (layer 7). A protocol from this layer, such as HTTP used to transmit web
pages, doesn't have to concern itself with how the data is being transmitted. It
can rely on services provided by the layer underneath it to effectively transmit
data. This is illustrated in the following diagram:




It should be noted that chunks of data are often referred to by different names
depending on the OSI layer they're on. A data unit on layer 2 is called a
frame, since layer 2 is responsible for framing messages. A data unit on layer 3
is referred to as a packet, while a data unit on layer 4 is a segment if it is part of
a TCP connection or a datagram if it is a UDP message.
In this book, we often use the term packet as a generic term to refer to a data unit
on any layer. However, segment will only be used in the context of a TCP
connection, and datagram will only refer to UDP datagrams.

As we will see in the next section, the OSI model doesn't fit precisely with the
common protocols in use today. However, it is still a handy model to explain
networking concerns, and it is still in widespread use for that purpose today.
TCP/IP layer model
The TCP/IP protocol suite is the most common network communication model
in use today. The TCP/IP reference model differs a bit from the OSI model, as it
has only four layers instead of seven.
The following diagram illustrates how the four layers of the TCP/IP model line
up to the seven layers of the OSI model:




Notably, the TCP/IP model doesn't match up exactly with the layers in the OSI
model. That's OK. In both models, the same functions are performed; they are
just divided differently.

The TCP/IP reference model was developed after the TCP/IP protocol was
already in common use. It differs from the OSI model by subscribing a less rigid,
although still hierarchical, model. For this reason, the OSI model is sometimes
better for understanding and reasoning about networking concerns, but the
TCP/IP model reflects a more realistic view of how networking is commonly
implemented today.

The four layers of the TCP/IP model are as follows:

    Network Access layer (1): On this layer, physical connections and data
     framing happen. Sending an Ethernet or Wi-Fi packet are examples of layer
     1 concerns.
     Internet layer (2): This layer deals with the concerns of addressing packets
     and routing them over multiple interconnection networks. It's at this layer
     that an IP address is defined.
     Host-to-Host layer (3): The host-to-host layer provides two protocols, TCP
     and UDP, which we will discuss in the next few chapters. These protocols
     address concerns such as data order, data segmentation, network
     congestion, and error correction.
     Process/Application layer (4): The process/application layer is where
     protocols such as HTTP, SMTP, and FTP are implemented. Most of the
     programs that feature in this book could be considered to take place on this
     layer while consuming functionality provided by our operating system's
     implementation of the lower layers.

Regardless of your chosen abstraction model, real-world protocols do work at
many levels. Lower levels are responsible for handling data for the higher levels.
These lower-level data structures must, therefore, encapsulate data from the
higher levels. Let's look at encapsulating data now.
Data encapsulation
The advantage of these abstractions is that, when programming an application,
we only need to consider the highest-level protocol. For example, a web browser
needs only to implement the protocols dealing specifically with websites—
HTTP, HTML, CSS, and so on. It does not need to bother with implementing
TCP/IP, and it certainly doesn't have to understand how an Ethernet or Wi-Fi
packet is encoded. It can rely on ready-made implementations of the lower
layers for these tasks. These implementations are provided by the operating
system (for example, Windows, Linux, and macOS).

When communicating over a network, data must be processed down through the
layers at the sender and up again through the layers at the receiver. For example,
if we have a web server, Host A, which is transmitting a web page to the
receiver, Host B, it may look like this:




The web page contains a few paragraphs of text, but the web server doesn't only
send the text by itself. For the text to be rendered correctly, it must be encoded in
an HTML structure:




In some cases, the text is already preformatted into HTML and saved that way
but, in this example, we are considering a web application that dynamically
generates the HTML, which is the most common paradigm for dynamic web
pages. As the text cannot be transmitted directly, neither can the HTML. It
instead must be transmitted as part of an HTTP response. The web server does
this by applying the appropriate HTTP response header to the HTML:




The HTTP is transmitted as part of a TCP session. This isn't done explicitly by
the web server, but is taken care of by the operating system's TCP/IP stack:




The TCP packet is routed by an IP packet:
This is transmitted over the wire in an Ethernet packet (or another protocol):




Luckily for us, the lower-level concerns are handled automatically when we use
the socket APIs for network programming. It is still useful to know what
happens behind the scenes. Without this knowledge, dealing with failures or
optimizing for performance is difficult if not impossible.

With some of the theory out of the way, let's dive into the actual protocols
powering modern networking.
Internet Protocol
Twenty years ago, there were many competing networking protocols. Today, one
protocol is overwhelmingly common—the Internet Protocol. It comes in two
versions—IPv4 and IPv6. IPv4 is completely ubiquitous and deployed
everywhere. If you're deploying network code today, you must support IPv4 or
risk that a significant portion of your users won't be able to connect.

IPv4 uses 32-bit addresses, which limits it to addressing no more than 232 or
4,294,967,296 systems. However, these 4.3 billion addresses were not initially
assigned efficiently, and now many Internet Service Providers (ISPs) are
forced to ration IPv4 addresses.

IPv6 was designed to replace IPv4 and has been standardized by the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) since 1998. It uses a 128-bit address, which
allows it to address a theoretical 2128 =
340,282,366,920,938,463,463,374,607,431,768,211,456, or about a 3.4 x 1038
addresses.

Today, every major desktop and smartphone operating system supports both
IPv4 and IPv6 in what is called a dual-stack configuration. However, many
applications, servers, and networks are still only configured to use IPv4. From a
practical standpoint, this means that you need to support IPv4 in order to access
much of the internet. However, you should also support IPv6 to be future-proof
and to help the world to transition away from IPv4.
What is an address?
All Internet Protocol traffic routes to an address. This is similar to how phone
calls must be dialed to phone numbers. IPv4 addresses are 32 bits long. They are
commonly divided into four 8-bit sections. Each section is displayed as a
decimal number between 0 and 255 inclusive and is delineated by a period.

Here are some examples of IPv4 addresses:

     0.0.0.0
     127.0.0.1
     10.0.0.0
     172.16.0.5
     192.168.0.1
     192.168.50.1
     255.255.255.255


A special address, called the loopback address, is reserved at 127.0.0.1. This
address essentially means establish a connection to myself. Operating systems
short-circuit this address so that packets to it never enter the network but instead
stay local on the originating system.

IPv4 reserves some address ranges for private use. If you're using IPv4 through a
router/NAT, then you are likely using an IP address in one of these ranges. These
reserved private ranges are as follows:

     10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255
     172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255
     192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255


The concept of IP address ranges is a useful one that comes up many times in
networking. It's probably not surprising then that there is a shorthand notation
for writing them. Using Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) notation, we
can write the three previous address ranges as follows:

     10.0.0.0/8
     172.16.0.0/12
     192.168.0.0/16


CIDR notation works by specifying the number of bits that are fixed. For
example, 10.0.0.0/8 specifies that the first eight bits of the 10.0.0.0 address are
fixed, the first eight bits being just the first 10. part; the remaining 0.0.0 part of
the address can be anything and still be on the 10.0.0.0/8 block.
Therefore, 10.0.0.0/8 encompasses 10.0.0.0 through 10.255.255.255.

IPv6 addresses are 128 bits long. They are written as eight groups of four
hexadecimal characters delineated by colons. A hexadecimal character can be
from 0-9 or from a-f. Here are some examples of IPv6 addresses:

     0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0001
     2001:0db8:0000:0000:0000:ff00:0042:8329
     fe80:0000:0000:0000:75f4:ac69:5fa7:67f9
     ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff


Note that the standard is to use lowercase letters in IPv6 addresses. This is in
contrast to many other uses of hexadecimal in computers.

There are a couple of rules for shortening IPv6 addresses to make them easier.
Rule 1 allows for the leading zeros in each section to be omitted (for example,
0db8 = db8). Rule 2 allows for consecutive sections of zeros to be replaced with a
double colon (::). Rule 2 may only be used once in each address; otherwise, the
address would be ambiguous.

Applying both rules, the preceding addresses can be shortened as follows:

     ::1
     2001:db8::ff00:42:8329
     fe80::75f4:ac69:5fa7:67f9
     ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff


Like IPv4, IPv6 also has a loopback address. It is ::1.

Dual-stack implementations also recognize a special class of IPv6 address that
map directly to an IPv4 address. These reserved addresses start with 80 zero bits,
and then by 16 one bits, followed by the 32-bit IPv4 address. Using CIDR
notation, this block of address is ::ffff:0:0/96.

These mapped addresses are commonly written with the first 96 bits in IPv6
format followed by the remaining 32 bits in IPv4 format. Here are some
examples:

 IPv6 Address                          Mapped IPv4 Address
 ::ffff:10.0.0.0                       10.0.0.0

 ::ffff:172.16.0.5                     172.16.0.5

 ::ffff:192.168.0.1                    192.168.0.1

 ::ffff:192.168.50.1                   192.168.50.1




You may also run into IPv6 site-local addresses. These site-local addresses are
in the fec0::/10 range and are for use on private local networks. Site-local
addresses have now been deprecated and should not be used for new networks,
but many existing implementations still use them.

Another address type that you should be familiar with are link-local addresses.
Link-local addresses are usable only on the local link. Routers never forward
packets from these addresses. They are useful for a system to accesses auto-
configuration functions before having an assigned IP address. Link-local
addresses are in the IPv4 169.254.0.0/16 address block or the IPv6 fe80::/10 address
block.

It should be noted the IPv6 introduces many additional features over IPv4
besides just a greatly expanded address range. IPv6 addresses have new
attributes, such as scope and lifetime, and it is normal for IPv6 network
interfaces to have multiple IPv6 addresses. IPv6 addresses are used and managed
differently than IPv4 addresses.

Regardless of these differences, in this book, we strive to write code that works
well for both IPv4 and IPv6.

If you think that IPv4 addresses are difficult to memorize, and IPv6 addresses
impossible, then you are not alone. Luckily, we have a system to assign names to
specific addresses.
Domain names
The Internet Protocol can only route packets to an IP address, not a name. So, if
you try to connect to a website, such as example.com, your system must first resolve
that domain name, example.com, into an IP address for the server that hosts that
website.

This is done by connecting to a Domain Name System (DNS) server. You
connect to a domain name server by knowing in advance its IP address. The IP
address for a domain name server is usually assigned by your ISP.

Many other domain name servers are made publicly available by different
organizations. Here are a few free and public DNS servers:

 DNS Provider                  IPv4 Addresses            IPv6 Addresses
 Cloudflare 1.1.1.1            1.1.1.1                   2606:4700:4700::1111

                               1.0.0.1                   2606:4700:4700::1001

 FreeDNS                       37.235.1.174

                               37.235.1.177

 Google Public DNS             8.8.8.8                   2001:4860:4860::8888

                               8.8.4.4                   2001:4860:4860::8844

 OpenDNS                       208.67.222.222            2620:0:ccc::2

                               208.67.220.220            2620:0:ccd::2



To resolve a hostname, your computer sends a UDP message to your domain
name server and asks it for an AAAA-type record for the domain you're trying to
resolve. If this record exists, an IPv6 address is returned. You can then connect
to a server at that address to load the website. If no AAAA record exists, then
your computer queries the server again, but asks for an A record. If this record
exists, you will receive an IPv4 address for the server. In many cases, a site will
publish an A record and an AAAA record that route to the same server.
It is also possible, and common, for multiple records of the same type to exist,
each pointing to a different address. This is useful for redundancy in the case
where multiple servers can provide the same service.

We will see a lot more about DNS queries in Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and
DNS.

Now that we have a basic understanding of IP addresses and names, let's look
into detail of how IP packets are routed over the internet.
Internet routing
If all networks contained only a maximum of only two devices, then there would
be no need for routing. Computer A would just send its data directly over the
wire, and computer B would receive it as the only possibility:




The internet today has an estimated 20 billion devices connected. When you
make a connection over the internet, your data first transmits to your local router.
From there, it is transmitted to another router, which is connected to another
router, and so on. Eventually, your data reaches a router that is connected to the
receiving device, at which point, the data has reached its destination:




Imagine that each router in the preceding diagram is connected to tens, hundreds,
or even thousands of other routers and systems. It's an amazing feat that IP can
discover the correct path and deliver traffic seamlessly.

Windows includes a utility, tracert, which lists the routers between your system
and the destination system.
Here is an example of using the tracert command on Windows 10 to trace the
route to example.com:




As you can see from the example, there are 11 hops between our system and the
destination system (example.com, 93.184.216.34). The IP addresses are listed for many
of these intermediate routers, but a few are missing with the Request timed
out message. This usually means that the system in question doesn't support the

part of the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) protocol needed. It's
not unusual to see a few such systems when running tracert.

In Unix-based systems, the utility to trace routes is called traceroute. You would
use it like traceroute example.com, for example, but the information obtained is
essentially the same.

More information on tracert and traceroute can be found in Chapter 12, Network
Monitoring and Security.

Sometimes, when IP packets are transferred between networks, their addresses
must be translated. This is especially common when using IPv4. Let's look at the
mechanism for this next.
Local networks and address
translation
It's common for households and organizations to have small Local Area
Networks (LANs). As mentioned previously, there are IPv4 addresses ranges
reserved for use in these small local networks.

These reserved private ranges are as follows:

     10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255
     172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255
     192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255


When a packet originates from a device on an IPv4 local network, it must
undergo Network Address Translation (NAT) before being routed on the
internet. A router that implements NAT remembers which local address a
connection is established from.

The devices on the same LAN can directly address one another by their local
address. However, any traffic communicated to the internet must undergo
address translation by the router. The router does this by modifying the source IP
address from the original private LAN IP address to its public internet IP
address:
Likewise, when the router receives the return communication, it must modify the
destination address from its public IP to the private IP of the original sender. It
knows the private IP address because it was stored in memory after the first
outgoing packet:




Network address translation can be more complicated than it first appears. In
addition to modifying the source IP address in the packet, it must also update the
checksums in the packet. Otherwise, the packet would be detected as containing
errors and discarded by the next router. The NAT router must also remember
which private IP address sent the packet in order to route the reply. Without
remembering the translation address, the NAT router wouldn't know where to
send the reply to on the private network.
NATs will also modify the packet data in some cases. For example, in the File
Transfer Protocol (FTP), some connection information is sent as part of the
packet's data. In these cases, the NAT router will look at the packet's data in
order to know how to forward future incoming packets. IPv6 largely avoids the
need for NAT, as it is possible (and common) for each device to have its own
publicly-addressable address.

You may be wondering how a router knows whether a message is locally
deliverable or whether it must be forwarded. This is done using a netmask,
subnet mask, or CIDR.
Subnetting and CIDR
IP addresses can be split into parts. The most significant bits are used to identify
the network or subnetwork, and the least significant bits are used to identify the
specific device on the network.

This is similar to how your home address can be split into parts. Your home
address includes a house number, a street name, and a city. The city is analogous
to the network part, the street name could be the subnetwork part, and your
house number is the device part.

IPv4 traditionally uses a mask notation to identify the IP address parts. For
example, consider a router on the 10.0.0.0 network with a subnet mask of
255.255.255.0. This router can take any incoming packet and perform a bitwise AND

operation with the subnet mask to determine whether the packet belongs on the
local subnet or needs to be forwarded on. For example, this router receives a
packet to be delivered to 10.0.0.105. It does a bitwise AND operation on this address
with the subnet mask of 255.255.255.0, which produces 10.0.0.0. That matches the
subnet of the router, so the traffic is local. If, instead, we consider a packet
destined for 10.0.15.22, the result of the bitwise AND with the subnet mask is
10.0.15.0. This address doesn't match the subnet the router is on, and so it must be
forwarded.

IPv6 uses CIDR. Networks and subnetworks are specified using the CIDR
notation we described earlier. For example, if the IPv6 subnet is /112, then the
router knows that any address that matches on the first 112 bits is on the local
subnet.

So far, we've covered only routing with one sender and one receiver. While this
is the most common situation, let's consider alternative cases too.
Multicast, broadcast, and anycast
When a packet is routed from one sender to one receiver, it uses unicast
addressing. This is the simplest and most common type of addressing. All of the
protocols we deal with in this book use unicast addressing.

Broadcast addressing allows a single sender to address a packet to all recipients
simultaneously. It is typically used to deliver a packet to every receiver on an
entire subnet.

If a broadcast is a one-to-all communication, then multicast is a one-to-many
communication. Multicast involves some group management, and a message is
addressed and delivered to members of a group.

Anycast addressed packets are used to deliver a message to one recipient when
you don't care who that recipient is. This is useful if you have several servers
that provide the same functionality, and you simply want one of them (you don't
care which) to handle your request.

IPv4 and lower network levels support local broadcast addressing. IPv4 provides
some optional (but commonly implemented) support for multicasting. IPv6
mandates multicasting support while providing additional features over IPv4's
multicasting. Though IPv6 is not considered to broadcast, its multicasting
functionality can essentially emulate it.

It's worth noting that these alternative addressing methods don't generally work
over the broader internet. Imagine if one peer was able to broadcast a packet to
every connected internet device. It would be a mess!

If you can use IP multicasting on your local network, though, it is worthwhile to
implement it. Sending one IP level multicast conserves bandwidth compared to
sending the same unicast message multiple times.

However, multicasting is often done at the application level. That is, when the
application wants to deliver the same message to several recipients, it sends the
message multiple times – once to each recipient. In Chapter 3, An In-Depth
Overview of TCP Connections, we build a chat room. This chat room could be
said to use application-level multicasting, but it does not take advantage of IP
multicasting.

We've covered how messages are routed through a network. Now, let's see how a
message knows which application is responsible for it once it arrives at a
specific system.
Port numbers
An IP address alone isn't quite enough. We need port numbers. To return to the
telephone analogy, if IP addresses are phone numbers, then port numbers are like
phone extensions.

Generally, an IP address gets a packet routed to a specific system, but a port
number is used to route the packet to a specific application on that system.

For example, on your system, you may be running multiple web browsers, an
email client, and a video-conferencing client. When your computer receives a
TCP segment or UDP datagram, your operating system looks at the destination
port number in that packet. That port number is used to look up which
application should handle it.

Port numbers are stored as unsigned 16-bit integers. This means that they are
between 0 and 65,535 inclusive.

Some port numbers for common protocols are as follows:

 Port
                       Protocol
 Number
                       File Transfer Protocol
   ,
 20 21        TCP
                       (FTP)
                                                             , Establishing
                                                      Chapter 11
 22           TCP      Secure Shell (SSH)             SSH Connections with
                                                      libssh
 23           TCP      Telnet
                       Simple Mail Transfer                  , Making Your
                                                      Chapter 8
 25           TCP
                       Protocol (SMTP)                Program Send Email
                       Domain Name System                     , Hostname
                                                      Chapter 5
 53           UDP
                       (DNS)                          Resolution and DNS
                                                           , Building a
                                                    Chapter 6

                      Hypertext Transfer            Simple Web Client
 80           TCP
                      Protocol (HTTP)
                                                           , Building a
                                                    Chapter 7

                                                    Simple Web Server

                      Post Office Protocol,
 110          TCP
                      Version 3 (POP3)
                      Internet Message Access
 143          TCP
                      Protocol (IMAP)
                      Internet Relay Chat
 194          TCP
                      (IRC)

                                                    Chapter 9, Loading Secure
                                                    Web Pages with HTTPS
                      HTTP over TLS/SSL
 443          TCP                                   and OpenSSL
                      (HTTPS)
                                                    Chapter 10, Implementing a
                                                    Secure Web Server

                      IMAP over TLS/SSL
 993          TCP
                      (IMAPS)
                      POP3 over TLS/SSL
 995          TCP
                      (POP3S)

Each of these listed port numbers is assigned by the Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority (IANA). They are responsible for the official assignments
of port numbers for specific protocols. Unofficial port usage is very common for
applications implementing custom protocols. In this case, the application should
try to choose a port number that is not in common use to avoid conflict.
Clients and servers
In the telephone analogy, a call must be initiated first by one party. The initiating
party dials the number for the receiving party, and the receiving party answers.

This is also a common paradigm in networking called the client-server model.
In this model, a server listens for connections. The client, knowing the address
and port number that the server is listening on, establishes the connection by
sending the first packet.

For example, the web server at example.com listens on port 80 (HTTP) and port 443
(HTTPS). A web browser (client) must establish the connection by sending the
first packet to the web server address and port.
Putting it together
A socket is one end-point of a communication link between systems. It's an
abstraction in which your application can send and receive data over the
network, in much the same way that your application can read and write to a file
using a file handle.

An open socket is uniquely defined by a 5-tuple consisting of the following:

     Local IP address
     Local port
     Remote IP address
     Remote port
     Protocol (UDP or TCP)

This 5-tuple is important, as it is how your operating system knows which
application is responsible for any packets received. For example, if you use two
web browsers to establish two simultaneous connections to example.com on port 80,
then your operating system keeps the connections separate by looking at the
local IP address, local port, remote IP address, remote port, and protocol. In this
case, the local IP addresses, remote IP addresses, remote port (80), and protocol
(TCP) are identical.

The deciding factor then is the local port (also called the ephemeral port),
which will have been chosen to be different by the operating system for
connection. This 5-tuple is also important to understand how NAT works. A
private network may have many systems accessing the same outside resource,
and the router NAT must store this five tuple for each connection in order to
know how to route received packets back into the private network.
What's your address?
You can find your IP address using the ipconfig command on Windows, or the
ifconfig command on Unix-based systems (such as Linux and macOS).


Using the ipconfig command from Windows PowerShell looks like this:




In this example, you can find that the IPv4 address is listed under Ethernet adapter
Ethernet0. Your system may have more network adapters, and each will have its
own IP address. We can tell that this computer is on a local network because the
IP address, 192.168.182.133, is in the private IP address range.

On Unix-based systems, we use either the ifconfig or ip addr commands.
The ifconfig command is the old way and is now deprecated on some systems.
The ip addr command is the new way, but not all systems support it yet.

Using the ifconfig command from a macOS terminal looks like this:




The IPv4 address is listed next to inet. In this case, we can see that it's
192.168.182.128. Again, we see that this computer is on a local network because of

the IP address range. The same adapter has an IPv6 address listed next to inet6.

The following screenshot shows using the ip addr command on Ubuntu Linux:
The preceding screenshot shows the local IPv4 address as 192.168.182.145. We can
also see that the link-local IPv6 address is fe80::df60:954e:211:7ff0.

These commands, ifconfig, ip addr, and ipconfig, show the IP address or addresses
for each adapter on your computer. You may have several. If you are on a local
network, the IP addresses you see will be your local private network IP
addresses.

If you are behind a NAT, there is often no good way to know your public IP
address. Usually, the only resort is to contact an internet server that provides an
API that informs you of your IP address.

A few free and public APIs for this are as follows:

     http://api.ipify.org/
     http://helloacm.com/api/what-is-my-ip-address/
     http://icanhazip.com/
     http://ifconfig.me/ip


You can test out these APIs in a web browser:
Each of these listed web pages should return your public IP address and not
much else. These sites are useful for when you need to determine your public IP
address from behind an NAT programmatically. We look at writing a small
HTTP client capable of downloading these web pages and others in Chapter 6,
Building a Simple Web Client.

Now that we've seen the built-in utilities for determining our local IP addresses,
let's next look at how to accomplish this from C.
Listing network adapters from C
Sometimes, it is useful for your C programs to know what your local address is.
For most of this book, we are able to write code that works both on Windows
and Unix-based (Linux and macOS) systems. However, the API for listing local
addresses is very different between systems. For this reason, we split this
program into two: one for Windows and one for Unix-based systems.

We will address the Windows case first.
Listing network adapters on
Windows
The Windows networking API is called Winsock, and we will go into much
more detail about it in the next chapter.

Whenever we are using Winsock, the first thing we must do is initialize it. This
is done with a call to WSAStartup(). Here is a small C program, win_init.c, showing
the initialization and cleanup of Winsock:
  /*win_init.c*/

  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

  int main() {
      WSADATA d;

      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          printf("Failed to initialize.\n");
          return -1;
      }

      WSACleanup();
      printf("Ok.\n");
      return 0;
  }


The WSAStartup() function is called with the requested version, Winsock 2.2 in this
case, and a WSADATA structure. The WSADATA structure will be filled in by WSAStartup()
with details about the Windows Sockets implementation.
The WSAStartup() function returns 0 upon success, and non-zero upon failure.

When a Winsock program is finished, it should call WSACleanup().

If you are using Microsoft Visual C as your compiler, then #pragma comment(lib,
"ws2_32.lib") tells Microsoft Visual C to link the executable with the Winsock

library, ws2_32.lib.

If you are using MinGW as your compiler, the pragma is ignored. You need to
explicitly tell the compiler to link in the library by adding the command-line
option, -lws2_32. For example, you can compile this program using MinGW with
the following command:
  gcc win_init.c -o win_init.exe -lws2_32


We will cover Winsock initialization and usage in more detail in Chapter 2,
Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.

Now that we know how to initialize Winsock, we will begin work on the
complete program to list network adapters on Windows. Please refer to the
win_list.c file to follow along.


To begin with, we need to define _WIN32_WINNT and include the needed headers:
  /*win_list.c*/

  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif

  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <iphlpapi.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>


The _WIN32_WINNT macro must be defined first so that the proper version of the
Windows headers are included. winsock2.h, iphlpapi.h, and ws2tcpip.h are the
Windows headers we need in order to list network adapters. We need stdio.h for
the printf() function and stdlib.h for memory allocation.

Next, we include the following pragmas to tell Microsoft Visual C which
libraries must be linked with the executable:
  /*win_list.c continued*/

  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")
  #pragma comment(lib, "iphlpapi.lib")


If you're compiling with MinGW, these lines will have no effect. You will need
to link to these libraries explicitly on the command line, for example, gcc
win_list.c -o win_list.exe -liphlpapi -lws2_32.


We then enter the main() function and initialize Winsock 2.2 using WSAStartup() as
described earlier. We check its return value to detect any errors:
  /*win_list.c continued*/

  int main() {

      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          printf("Failed to initialize.\n");
          return -1;
      }


Next, we allocate memory for the adapters, and we request the adapters'
addresses from Windows using the GetAdapterAddresses() function:
  /*win_list.c continued*/

      DWORD asize = 20000;
      PIP_ADAPTER_ADDRESSES adapters;
      do {
          adapters = (PIP_ADAPTER_ADDRESSES)malloc(asize);

          if (!adapters) {
              printf("Couldn't allocate %ld bytes for adapters.\n", asize);
              WSACleanup();
              return -1;
          }

          int r = GetAdaptersAddresses(AF_UNSPEC, GAA_FLAG_INCLUDE_PREFIX, 0,
                  adapters, &asize);
          if (r == ERROR_BUFFER_OVERFLOW) {
              printf("GetAdaptersAddresses wants %ld bytes.\n", asize);
              free(adapters);
          } else if (r == ERROR_SUCCESS) {
              break;
          } else {
              printf("Error from GetAdaptersAddresses: %d\n", r);
              free(adapters);
              WSACleanup();
              return -1;
          }
      } while (!adapters);


The asize variable will store the size of our adapters' address buffer. To begin
with, we set it to 20000 and allocate 20,000 bytes to adapters using
the malloc() function. The malloc() function will return 0 on failure, so we test for
that and display an error message if allocation failed.

Next, we call GetAdapterAddresses(). The first parameter, AF_UNSPEC, tells Windows
that we want both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses. You can pass in AF_INET or AF_INET6 to
request only IPv4 or only IPv6 addresses. The second parameter,
GAA_FLAG_INCLUDE_PREFIX, is required to request a list of addresses. The next

parameter is reserved and should be passed in as 0 or NULL. Finally, we pass in our
buffer, adapters, and a pointer to its size, asize.
If our buffer is not big enough to store all of the addresses, then
GetAdapterAddresses() returns ERROR_BUFFER_OVERFLOW and sets asize to the required

buffer size. In this case, we free our adapters buffer and try the call again with a
larger buffer.

On success, GetAdapterAddresses() returns ERROR_SUCCESS, in which case, we break
from the loop and continue. Any other return value is an error.

When GetAdapterAddresses() returns successfully, it will have written a linked list
into adapters with each adapter's address information. Our next step is to loop
through this linked list and print information for each adapter and address:
  /*win_list.c continued*/

      PIP_ADAPTER_ADDRESSES adapter = adapters;
      while (adapter) {
          printf("\nAdapter name: %S\n", adapter->FriendlyName);

          PIP_ADAPTER_UNICAST_ADDRESS address = adapter->FirstUnicastAddress;
          while (address) {
              printf("\t%s",
                      address->Address.lpSockaddr->sa_family == AF_INET ?
                      "IPv4" : "IPv6");

              char ap[100];

              getnameinfo(address->Address.lpSockaddr,
                      address->Address.iSockaddrLength,
                      ap, sizeof(ap), 0, 0, NI_NUMERICHOST);
              printf("\t%s\n", ap);

              address = address->Next;
          }

          adapter = adapter->Next;
      }


We first define a new variable, adapter, which we use to walk through the linked
list of adapters. The first adapter is at the beginning of adapters, so we initially set
adapter to adapters. At the end of each loop, we set adapter = adapter->Next; to get the
next adapter. The loop aborts when adapter is 0, which means we've reached the
end of the list.

We get the adapter name from adapter->FriendlyName, which we then print using
printf().


The first address for each adapter is in adapter->FirstUnicastAddress. We define a
second pointer, address, and set it to this address. Addresses are also stored as a
linked list, so we begin an inner loop that walks through the addresses.

The address->Address.lpSockaddr->sa_family variable stores the address family type. If
it is set to AF_INET, then we know this is an IPv4 address. Otherwise, we assume it
is an IPv6 address (in which case the family is AF_INET6).

Next, we allocate a buffer, ap, to store the text representation of the address. The
getnameinfo() function is called to convert the address into a standard notation

address. We'll cover more about getnameinfo() in the next chapter.

Finally, we can print the address from our buffer, ap, using printf().

We finish the program by freeing the allocated memory and calling WSACleanup():
  /*win_list.c continued*/

      free(adapters);
      WSACleanup();
      return 0;
  }


On Windows, using MinGW, you can compile and run the program with the
following:
  gcc win_list.c -o win_list.exe -liphlpapi -lws2_32
  win_list


It should list each of your adapter's names and addresses.

Now that we can list local IP addresses on Windows, let's consider the same task
for Unix-based systems.
Listing network adapters on Linux
and macOS
Listing local network addresses is somewhat easier on a Unix-based system,
compared to Windows. Load up unix_list.c to follow along.

To begin with, we include the necessary system headers:
  /*unix_list.c*/

  #include <sys/socket.h>
  #include <netdb.h>
  #include <ifaddrs.h>
  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>


We then enter the main function:
  /*unix_list.c continued*/

  int main() {

      struct ifaddrs *addresses;

      if (getifaddrs(&addresses) == -1) {
          printf("getifaddrs call failed\n");
          return -1;
      }


We declare a variable, addresses, which stores the addresses. A call to the
getifaddrs() function allocates memory and fills in a linked list of addresses. This

function returns 0 on success or -1 on failure.

Next, we use a new pointer, address, to walk through the linked list of addresses.
After considering each address, we set address = address->ifa_next to get the next
address. We stop the loop when address == 0, which happens at the end of the
linked list:
  /*unix_list.c continued*/

      struct ifaddrs *address = addresses;
      while(address) {
          int family = address->ifa_addr->sa_family;
          if (family == AF_INET || family == AF_INET6) {
              printf("%s\t", address->ifa_name);
              printf("%s\t", family == AF_INET ? "IPv4" : "IPv6");

              char ap[100];
              const int family_size = family == AF_INET ?
                  sizeof(struct sockaddr_in) : sizeof(struct sockaddr_in6);
              getnameinfo(address->ifa_addr,
                      family_size, ap, sizeof(ap), 0, 0, NI_NUMERICHOST);
              printf("\t%s\n", ap);

          }
          address = address->ifa_next;
      }


For each address, we identify the address family. We are interested in AF_INET
(IPv4 addresses) and AF_INET6 (IPv6 addresses). The getifaddrs() function can
return other types, so we skip those.

For each address, we then continue to print its adapter name and its address type,
IPv4 or IPv6.

We then define a buffer, ap, to store the textual address. A call to the getnameinfo()
function fills in this buffer, which we can then print. We cover the getnameinfo()
function in more detail in the next chapter, Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket
APIs.

Finally, we free the memory allocated by getifaddrs() and we have finished:
  /*unix_list.c continued*/

      freeifaddrs(addresses);
      return 0;
  }


On Linux and macOS, you can compile and run this program with the following:
  gcc unix_list.c -o unix_list
  ./unix_list


It should list each of your adapter's names and addresses.
Summary
In this chapter, we looked briefly at how internet traffic is routed. We learned
that there are two Internet Protocol versions, IPv4 and IPv6. IPv4 has a limited
number of addresses, and these addresses are running out. One of IPv6's main
advantages is that it has enough address space for every system to have its own
unique publicly-routable address. The limited address space of IPv4 is largely
mitigated by network address translation performed by routers. We also looked
at how to detect your local IP address using both utilities and APIs provided by
the operating system.

We saw that the APIs provided for listing local IP addresses differ quite a bit
between Windows and Unix-based operating systems. In future chapters, we will
see that most other networking functions are similar between operating systems,
and we can write one portable program that works between operating systems.

It's OK if you didn't pick up all of the details in this chapter. Most of this
information is a helpful background, but it's not essential to most network
application programming. Details such as network address translation are
handled by the network, and these details will not usually need to be explicitly
addressed by your programs.

In the next chapter, we will reinforce the ideas covered here by introducing
socket-programming APIs.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge from this chapter:

      1. What are the key differences between IPv4 and IPv6?
      2. Are the IP addresses given by the ipconfig and ifconfig commands the
         same IP addresses that a remote web server sees if you connect to it?
      3. What is the IPv4 loopback address?
      4. What is the IPv6 loopback address?
      5. How are domain names (for example, example.com) resolved into IP
         addresses?
      6. How can you find your public IP address?
      7. How does an operating system know which application is responsible
         for an incoming packet?

The answers are in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Getting to Grips with Socket APIs
In this chapter, we will begin to really start working with network programming.
We will introduce the concept of sockets, and explain a bit of the history behind
them. We will cover the important differences between the socket APIs provided
by Windows and Unix-like operating systems, and we will review the common
functions that are used in socket programming. This chapter ends with a concrete
example of turning a simple console program into a networked program you can
access through your web browser.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     What are sockets?
     Which header files are used with socket programming?
     How to compile a socket program on Windows, Linux, and macOS
     Connection-oriented and connectionless sockets
     TCP and UDP protocols
     Common socket functions
     Building a simple console program into a web server
Technical requirements
The example programs in this chapter can be compiled with any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW on Windows and GCC on Linux and macOS.
See Appendix B, Setting Up Your C Compiler On Windows, Appendix C, Setting Up
Your C Compiler On Linux, and Appendix D, Setting Up Your C Compiler On
macOS, for compiler setup.

The code for this book can be found here: https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Networ
k-Programming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap02


Each example program in this chapter is standalone, and each example runs on
Windows, Linux, and macOS. When compiling for Windows, keep in mind that
most of the example programs require linking with the Winsock library.

This is accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to gcc. We provide the exact
commands needed to compile each example as they are introduced.
What are sockets?
A socket is one endpoint of a communication link between systems. Your
application sends and receives all of its network data through a socket.

There are a few different socket application programming interfaces (APIs).
The first were Berkeley sockets, which were released in 1983 with 4.3BSD
Unix. The Berkeley socket API was widely successful and quickly evolved into
a de facto standard. From there, it was adopted as a POSIX standard with little
modification. The terms Berkeley sockets, BSD sockets, Unix sockets,
and Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) sockets are often used
interchangeably.

If you're using Linux or macOS, then your operating system provides a proper
implementation of Berkeley sockets.

Windows' socket API is called Winsock. It was created to be largely compatible
with Berkeley sockets. In this book, we strive to create cross-platform code that
is valid for both Berkeley sockets and Winsock.

Historically, sockets were used for inter-process communication (IPC) as well
as various network protocols. In this book, we use sockets only for
communication with TCP and UDP.

Before we can start using sockets, we need to do a bit of setup. Let's dive right
in!
Socket setup
Before we can use the socket API, we need to include the socket API header
files. These files vary depending on whether we are using Berkeley sockets or
Winsock. Additionally, Winsock requires initialization before use. It also
requires that a cleanup function is called when we are finished. These
initialization and cleanup steps are not used with Berkeley sockets.

We will use the C preprocessor to run the proper code on Windows compared to
Berkeley socket systems. By using the preprocessor statement, #if defined(_WIN32),
we can include code in our program that will only be compiled on Windows.

Here is a complete program that includes the needed socket API headers for each
platform and properly initializes Winsock on Windows:
  /*sock_init.c*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

  #else
  #include <sys/types.h>
  #include <sys/socket.h>
  #include <netinet/in.h>
  #include <arpa/inet.h>
  #include <netdb.h>
  #include <unistd.h>
  #include <errno.h>

  #endif

  #include <stdio.h>

  int main() {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif

      printf("Ready to use socket API.\n");
  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      return 0;
  }


The first part includes winsock.h and ws2tcpip.h on Windows. _WIN32_WINNT must be
defined for the Winsock headers to provide all the functions we need. We also
include the #pragma comment(lib,"ws2_32.lib") pragma statement. This tells the
Microsoft Visual C compiler to link your program against the Winsock library,
ws2_32.lib. If you're using MinGW as your compiler, then #pragma is ignored. In

this case, you need to tell the compiler to link in ws2_32.lib on the command line
using the -lws2_32 option.

If the program is not compiled on Windows, then the section after #else will
compile. This section includes the various Berkeley socket API headers and
other headers we need on these platforms.

In the main() function, we call WSAStartup() on Windows to initialize Winsock. The
MAKEWORD macro allows us to request Winsock version 2.2. If our program is unable

to initialize Winsock, it prints an error message and aborts.

When using Berkeley sockets, no special initialization is needed, and the socket
API is always ready to use.

Before our program finishes, WSACleanup() is called if we're compiling for Winsock
on Windows. This function allows the Windows operating system to do
additional cleanup.

Compiling and running this program on Linux or macOS is done with the
following command:
  gcc sock_init.c -o sock_init
  ./sock_init


Compiling on Windows using MinGW can be done with the following
command:
  gcc sock_init.c -o sock_init.exe -lws2_32
  sock_init.exe


Notice that the -lws2_32 flag is needed with MinGW to tell the compiler to link in
the Winsock library, ws2_32.lib.

Now that we've done the necessary setup to begin using the socket APIs, let's
take a closer look at what we will be using these sockets for.
Two types of sockets
Sockets come in two basic types—connection-oriented and connectionless.
These terms refer to types of protocols. Beginners sometimes get confused with
the term connectionless. Of course, two systems communicating over a network
are in some sense connected. Keep in mind that these terms are used with special
meanings, which we will cover shortly, and should not imply that some protocols
manage to send data without a connection.

The two protocols that are used today are Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). TCP is a connection-
oriented protocol, and UDP is a connectionless protocol.

The socket APIs also support other less-common or outdated protocols, which
we do not cover in this book.

In a connectionless protocol, such as UDP, each data packet is addressed
individually. From the protocol's perspective, each data packet is completely
independent and unrelated to any packets coming before or after it.

A good analogy for UDP is postcards. When you send a postcard, there is no
guarantee that it will arrive. There is also no way to know if it did arrive. If you
send many postcards at once, there is no way to predict what order they will
arrive in. It is entirely possible that the first postcard you send gets delayed and
arrives weeks after the last postcard was sent.

With UDP, these same caveats apply. UDP makes no guarantee that a packet will
arrive. UDP doesn't generally provide a method to know if a packet did not
arrive, and UDP does not guarantee that the packets will arrive in the same order
they were sent. As you can see, UDP is no more reliable than postcards. In fact,
you may consider it less reliable, because with UDP, it is possible that a single
packet may arrive twice!

If you need reliable communication, you may be tempted to develop a scheme
where you number each packet that's sent. For the first packet sent, you number
it one, the second packet sent is numbered two, and so on. You could also
request that the receiver send an acknowledgment for each packet. When the
receiver gets packet one, it sends a return message, packet one received. In this
way, the receiver can be sure that received packets are in the proper order. If the
same packet arrives twice, the receiver can just ignore the redundant copy. If a
packet isn't received at all, the sender knows from the missing acknowledgment
and can resend it.

This scheme is essentially what connection-oriented protocols, such as TCP, do.
TCP guarantees that data arrives in the same order it is sent. It prevents duplicate
data from arriving twice, and it retries sending missing data. It also provides
additional features such as notifications when a connection is terminated and
algorithms to mitigate network congestion. Furthermore, TCP implements these
features with an efficiency that is not achievable by piggybacking a custom
reliability scheme on top of UDP.

For these reasons, TCP is used by many protocols. HTTP (for severing web
pages), FTP (for transferring files), SSH (for remote administration), and SMTP
(for delivering email) all use TCP. We will cover HTTP, SSH, and SMTP in the
coming chapters.

UDP is used by DNS (for resolving domain names). It is suitable for this purpose
because an entire request and response can fit in a single packet.

UDP is also commonly used in real-time applications, such as audio streaming,
video streaming, and multiplayer video games. In real-time applications, there is
often no reason to retry sending dropped packets, so TCP's guarantees are
unnecessary. For example, if you are streaming live video and a few packets get
dropped, the video simply resumes when the next packet arrives. There is no
reason to resend (or even detect) the dropped packet, as the video has already
progressed past that point.

UDP also has the advantage in cases where you want to send a message without
expecting a response from the other end. This makes it useful when using IP
broadcast or multicast. TCP, on the other hand, requires bidirectional
communication to provide its guarantees, and TCP does not work with IP
multicast or broadcast.

If the guarantees that TCP provides are not needed, then UDP can achieve
greater efficiency. This is because TCP adds some additional overhead by
numbering packets. TCP must also delay packets that arrive out of order, which
can cause unnecessary delays in real-time applications. If you do need the
guarantees provided by TCP, however, it is almost always preferable to use TCP
instead of trying to add those mechanisms to UDP.

Now that we have an idea of the communication models we use sockets for, let's
look at the actual functions that are used in socket programming.
Socket functions
The socket APIs provide many functions for use in network programming. Here
are the common socket functions that we use in this book:

     socket() creates and initializes a new socket.
     bind() associates a socket with a particular local IP address and port number.
     listen() is used on the server to cause a TCP socket to listen for new
     connections.
     connect() is used on the client to set the remote address and port. In the case
     of TCP, it also establishes a connection.
     accept() is used on the server to create a new socket for an incoming TCP
     connection.
     send() and recv() are used to send and receive data with a socket.
     sendto() and recvfrom() are used to send and receive data from sockets
     without a bound remote address.
     close() (Berkeley sockets) and closesocket() (Winsock sockets) are used to
     close a socket. In the case of TCP, this also terminates the connection.
     shutdown() is used to close one side of a TCP connection. It is useful to
     ensure an orderly connection teardown.
     select() is used to wait for an event on one or more sockets.
     getnameinfo() and getaddrinfo() provide a protocol-independent manner of
     working with hostnames and addresses.
     setsockopt() is used to change some socket options.
     fcntl() (Berkeley sockets) and ioctlsocket() (Winsock sockets) are also used
     to get and set some socket options.

You may see some Berkeley socket networking programs using read() and
write(). These functions don't port to Winsock, so we prefer send() and recv() here.
Some other common functions that are used with Berkeley sockets are poll() and
dup(). We will avoid these in order to keep our programs portable.


Other differences between Berkeley sockets and Winsock sockets are addressed
later in this chapter.

Now that we have an idea of the functions involved, let's consider program
design and flow next.
Anatomy of a socket program
As we mentioned in Chapter 1, An Introduction to Networks and Protocols,
network programming is usually done using a client-server paradigm. In this
paradigm, a server listens for new connections at a published address. The client,
knowing the server's address, is the one to establish the connection initially.
Once the connection is established, the client and the server can both send and
receive data. This can continue until either the client or the server terminates the
connection.

A traditional client-server model usually implies different behaviors for the
client and server. The way web browsing works, for example, is that the server
resides at a known address, waiting for connections. A client (web browser)
establishes a connection and sends a request that includes which web page or
resource it wants to download. The server then checks that it knows what to do
with this request and responds appropriately (by sending the web page).

An alternative paradigm is the peer-to-peer model. For example, this model is
used by the BitTorrent protocol. In the peer-to-peer model, each peer has
essentially the same responsibilities. While a web server is optimized to send
requested data from the server to the client, a peer-to-peer protocol is balanced in
that data is exchanged somewhat evenly between peers. However, even in the
peer-to-peer model, the underlying sockets that are using TCP or UDP aren't
created equal. That is, for each peer-to-peer connection, one peer was listening
and the other connecting. BitTorrent works by having a central server (called a
tracker) that stores a list of peer IP addresses. Each of the peers on that list has
agreed to behave like a server and listen for new connections. When a new peer
wants to join the swarm, it requests a list of peers from the central server, and
then tries to establish a connection to peers on that list while simultaneously
listening for new connections from other peers. In summary, a peer-to-peer
protocol doesn't so much replace the client-server model; it is just expected that
each peer be a client and a server both.

Another common protocol that pushes the boundary of the client-server
paradigm is FTP. The FTP server listens for connections until the FTP client
connects. After the initial connection, the FTP client issues commands to the
server. If the FTP client requests a file from the server, the server will attempt to
establish a new connection to the FTP client to transfer the file over. So, for this
reason, the FTP client first establishes a connection as a TCP client, but later
accepts connections like a TCP server.

Network programs can usually be described as one of four types—a TCP server,
a TCP client, a UDP server, or a UDP client. Some protocols call for a program
to implement two, or even all four types, but it is useful for us to consider each
of the four types separately.
TCP program flow
A TCP client program must first know the TCP server's address. This is often
input by a user. In the case of a web browser, the server address is either input
directly by the user into the address bar, or is known from the user clicking on a
link. The TCP client takes this address (for example, http://example.com) and uses
the getaddrinfo() function to resolve it into a struct addrinfo structure. The client
then creates a socket using a call to socket(). The client then establishes the new
TCP connection by calling connect(). At this point, the client can freely exchange
data using send() and recv().

A TCP server listens for connections at a particular port number on a particular
interface. The program must first initialize a struct addrinfo structure with the
proper listening IP address and port number. The getaddrinfo() function is helpful
so that you can do this in an IPv4/IPv6 independent way. The server then creates
the socket with a call to socket(). The socket must be bound to the listening IP
address and port. This is accomplished with a call to bind().

The server program then calls listen(), which puts the socket in a state where it
listens for new connections. The server can then call accept(), which will wait
until a client establishes a connection to the server. When the new connection
has been established, accept() returns a new socket. This new socket can be used
to exchange data with the client using send() and recv(). Meanwhile, the first
socket remains listening for new connections, and repeated calls to accept() allow
the server to handle multiple clients.

Graphically, the program flow of a TCP client and server looks like this:
The program flow given here should serve as a good example of how basic
client-server TCP programs interact. That said, considerable variation on this
basic program flow is possible. There is also no rule about which side calls send()
or recv() first, or how many times. Both sides could call send() as soon as the
connection is established.

Also, note that the TCP client could call bind() before connect() if it is particular
about which network interface is being used to connect with. This is sometimes
important on servers that have multiple network interfaces. It's often not
important for general purpose software.

Many other variations of TCP operation are possible too, and we will look at
some in Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections.
UDP program flow
A UDP client must know the address of the remote UDP peer in order to send the
first packet. The UDP client uses the getaddrinfo() function to resolve the address
into a struct addrinfo structure. Once this is done, the client creates a socket of the
proper type. The client can then call sendto() on the socket to send the first
packet. The client can continue to call sendto() and recvfrom() on the socket to send
and receive additional packets. Note that the client must send the first packet
with sendto(). The UDP client cannot receive data first, as the remote peer would
have no way of knowing where to send data without it first receiving data from
the client. This is different from TCP, where a connection is first established with
a handshake. In TCP, either the client or server can send the first application
data.

A UDP server listens for connections from a UDP client. This server should
initialize struct addrinfo structure with the proper listening IP address and port
number. The getaddrinfo() function can be used to do this in a protocol-
independent way. The server then creates a new socket with socket() and binds it
to the listening IP address and port number using bind(). At this point, the server
can call recvfrom(), which causes it to block until it receives data from a UDP
client. After the first data is received, the server can reply with sendto() or listen
for more data (from the first client or any new client) with recvfrom().

Graphically, the program flow of a UDP client and server looks like this:
We cover some variations of this example program flow in Chapter 4, Establishing
UDP Connections.

We're almost ready to begin implementing our first networked program, but
before we begin, we should take care of some cross-platform concerns. Let's
work on this now.
Berkeley sockets versus Winsock
sockets
As we stated earlier, Winsock sockets were modeled on Berkeley sockets.
Therefore, there are many similarities between them. However, there are also
many differences we need to be aware of.

In this book, we will try to create each program so that it can run on both
Windows and Unix-based operating systems. This is made much easier by
defining a few C macros to help us with this.
Header files
As we mentioned earlier, the needed header files differ between
implementations. We've already seen how these header file discrepancies can be
easily overcome with a preprocessor statement.
Socket data type
In UNIX, a socket descriptor is represented by a standard file descriptor. This
means you can use any of the standard UNIX file I/O functions on sockets. This
isn't true on Windows, so we simply avoid these functions to maintain
portability.

Additionally, in UNIX, all file descriptors (and therefore socket descriptors) are
small, non-negative integers. In Windows, a socket handle can be anything.
Furthermore, in UNIX, the socket() function returns an int, whereas in Windows
it returns a SOCKET. SOCKET is a typedef for an unsigned int in the Winsock headers. As
a workaround, I find it useful to either typedef int SOCKET or #define SOCKET int on
non-Windows platforms. That way, you can store a socket descriptor as a SOCKET
type on all platforms:
  #if !defined(_WIN32)
  #define SOCKET int
  #endif
Invalid sockets
On Windows, socket() returns INVALID_SOCKET if it fails. On Unix, socket() returns a
negative number on failure. This is particularly problematic as the Windows
SOCKET type is unsigned. I find it useful to define a macro to indicate if a socket

descriptor is valid or not:
  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
  #else
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
  #endif
Closing sockets
All sockets on Unix systems are also standard file descriptors. For this reason,
sockets on Unix systems can be closed using the standard close() function. On
Windows, a special close function is used instead—closesocket(). It's useful to
abstract out this difference with a macro:
  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
  #else
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
  #endif
Error handling
When a socket function, such as socket(), bind(), accept(), and so on, has an error
on a Unix platform, the error number gets stored in the thread-global errno
variable. On Windows, the error number can be retrieved by calling
WSAGetLastError() instead. Again, we can abstract out this difference using a macro:

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())
  #else
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
  #endif




In addition to obtaining an error code, it is often useful to retrieve a text
description of the error condition. Please refer to Chapter 13, Socket Programming
Tips and Pitfalls, for a technique for this.

With these helper macros out of the way, let's dive into our first real socket
program.
Our first program
Now that we have a basic idea of socket APIs and the structure of networked
programs, we are ready to begin our first program. By building an actual real-
world program, we will learn the useful details of how socket programming
actually works.

As an example task, we are going to build a web server that tells you what time
it is right now. This could be a useful resource for anybody with a smartphone or
web browser that needs to know what time it is right now. They can simply
navigate to our web page and find out. This is a good first example because it
does something useful but still trivial enough that it won't distract from what we
are trying to learn—network programming.
A motivating example
Before we begin the networked program, it is useful to solve our problem with a
simple console program first. In general, it is a good idea to work out your
program's functionality locally before adding in networked features.

The local, console version of our time-telling program is as follows:
  /*time_console.c*/

  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <time.h>

  int main()
  {
      time_t timer;
      time(&timer);

      printf ("Local time is: %s", ctime(&timer));

      return 0;
  }


You can compile and run it like this:
  $ gcc time_console.c -o time_console
  $ ./time_console
  Local time is: Fri Oct 19 08:42:05 2018


The program works by getting the time with the built-in C time() function. It then
converts it into a string with the ctime() function.
Making it networked
Now that we've worked out our program's functionality, we can begin on the
networked version of the same program.

To begin with, we include the needed headers:
  /*time_server.c*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

  #else
  #include <sys/types.h>
  #include <sys/socket.h>
  #include <netinet/in.h>
  #include <arpa/inet.h>
  #include <netdb.h>
  #include <unistd.h>
  #include <errno.h>

  #endif


As we discussed earlier, this detects if the compiler is running on Windows or
not and includes the proper headers for the platform it is running on.

We also define some macros, which abstract out some of the difference between
the Berkeley socket and Winsock APIs:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

  #else
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
  #define SOCKET int
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
  #endif


We need a couple of standard C headers, hopefully for obvious reasons:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <string.h>
  #include <time.h>


Now, we are ready to begin the main() function. The first thing the main() function
will do is initialize Winsock if we are compiling on Windows:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

  int main() {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


We must now figure out the local address that our web server should bind to:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

      printf("Configuring local address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_family = AF_INET;
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;
      hints.ai_flags = AI_PASSIVE;

      struct addrinfo *bind_address;
      getaddrinfo(0, "8080", &hints, &bind_address);


We use getaddrinfo() to fill in a struct addrinfo structure with the needed
information. getaddrinfo() takes a hints parameter, which tells it what we're
looking for. In this case, we've zeroed out hints using memset() first. Then, we set
ai_family = AF_INET. AF_INET specifies that we are looking for an IPv4 address. We
could use AF_INET6 to make our web server listen on an IPv6 address instead
(more on this later).

Next, we set ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM. This indicates that we're going to be using
TCP. SOCK_DGRAM would be used if we were doing a UDP server instead.
Finally, ai_flags = AI_PASSIVE is set. This is telling getaddrinfo() that we want it to
bind to the wildcard address. That is, we are asking getaddrinfo() to set up the
address, so we listen on any available network interface.

Once hints is set up properly, we declare a pointer to a struct addrinfo structure,
which holds the return information from getaddrinfo(). We then call
the getaddrinfo() function. The getaddrinfo() function has many uses, but for our
purpose, it generates an address that's suitable for bind(). To make it generate
this, we must pass in the first parameter as NULL and have the AI_PASSIVE flag set in
hints.ai_flags.


The second parameter to getaddrinfo() is the port we listen for connections on. A
standard HTTP server would use port 80. However, only privileged users on
Unix-like operating systems can bind to ports 0 through 1023. The choice of port
number here is arbitrary, but we use 8080 to avoid issues. If you are running with
superuser privileges, feel free to change the port number to 80 if you like. Keep
in mind that only one program can bind to a particular port at a time. If you try
to use a port that is already in use, then the call to bind() fails. In this case, just
change the port number to something else and try again.

It is common to see programs that don't use getaddrinfo() here. Instead, they fill in
a struct addrinfo structure directly. The advantage to using getaddrinfo() is that it is
protocol-independent. Using getaddrinfo() makes it very easy to convert our
program from IPv4 to IPv6. In fact, we only need to change AF_INET to AF_INET6,
and our program will work on IPv6. If we filled in the struct addrinfo
structure directly, we would need to make many tedious changes to convert our
program into IPv6.

Now that we've figured out our local address info, we can create the socket:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET socket_listen;
      socket_listen = socket(bind_address->ai_family,
              bind_address->ai_socktype, bind_address->ai_protocol);


Here, we define socket_listen as a SOCKET type. Recall that SOCKET is a Winsock type
on Windows, and that we have a macro defining it as int on other platforms. We
call the socket() function to generate the actual socket. socket() takes three
parameters: the socket family, the socket type, and the socket protocol. The
reason we used getaddrinfo() before calling socket() is that we can now pass in
parts of bind_address as the arguments to socket(). Again, this makes it very easy to
change our program's protocol without needing a major rewrite.

It is common to see programs written so that they call socket() first. The problem
with this is that it makes the program more complicated as the socket family,
type, and protocol must be entered multiple times. Structuring our program as
we have here is better.

We should check that the call to socket() was successful:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

     if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_listen)) {
         fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


We can check that socket_listen is valid using the ISVALIDSOCKET() macro we defined
earlier. If the socket is not valid, we print an error message. Our GETSOCKETERRNO()
macro is used to retrieve the error number in a cross-platform way.

After the socket has been created successfully, we can call bind() to associate it
with our address from getaddrinfo():
  /*time_server.c continued*/

         printf("Binding socket to local address...\n");
         if (bind(socket_listen,
                     bind_address->ai_addr, bind_address->ai_addrlen)) {
             fprintf(stderr, "bind() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
             return 1;
         }
         freeaddrinfo(bind_address);


bind()returns 0 on success and non-zero on failure. If it fails, we print the error
number much like we did for the error handling on socket(). bind() fails if the port
we are binding to is already in use. In that case, either close the program using
that port or change your program to use a different port.

After we have bound to bind_address, we can call the freeaddrinfo() function to
release the address memory.

Once the socket has been created and bound to a local address, we can cause it to
start listening for connections with the listen() function:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

         printf("Listening...\n");
         if (listen(socket_listen, 10) < 0) {
             fprintf(stderr, "listen() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
             return 1;
         }
The second argument to listen(), which is 10 in this case, tells listen() how many
connections it is allowed to queue up. If many clients are connecting to our
server all at once, and we aren't dealing with them fast enough, then the
operating system begins to queue up these incoming connections. If 10
connections become queued up, then the operating system will reject new
connections until we remove one from the existing queue.

Error handling for listen() is done the same way as we did for bind() and socket().

After the socket has begun listening for connections, we can accept any
incoming connection with the accept() function:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

      printf("Waiting for connection...\n");
      struct sockaddr_storage client_address;
      socklen_t client_len = sizeof(client_address);
      SOCKET socket_client = accept(socket_listen,
              (struct sockaddr*) &client_address, &client_len);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_client)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "accept() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


accept() has a few functions. First, when it's called, it will block your program
until a new connection is made. In other words, your program will sleep until a
connection is made to the listening socket. When the new connection is made,
accept() will create a new socket for it. Your original socket continues to listen
for new connections, but the new socket returned by accept() can be used to send
and receive data over the newly established connection. accept() also fills in
address info of the client that connected.

Before calling accept(), we must declare a new struct sockaddr_storage variable to
store the address info for the connecting client. The struct sockaddr_storage type is
guaranteed to be large enough to hold the largest supported address on your
system. We must also tell accept() the size of the address buffer we're passing in.
When accept() returns, it will have filled in client_address with the connected
client's address and client_len with the length of that address. client_len differs,
depending on whether the connection is using IPv4 or IPv6.

We store the return value of accept() in socket_client. We check for errors by
detecting if client_socket is a valid socket. This is done in exactly the same way as
we did for socket().
At this point, a TCP connection has been established to a remote client. We can
print the client's address to the console:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

      printf("Client is connected... ");
      char address_buffer[100];
      getnameinfo((struct sockaddr*)&client_address,
              client_len, address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer), 0, 0,
              NI_NUMERICHOST);
      printf("%s\n", address_buffer);


This step is completely optional, but it is good practice to log network
connections somewhere.

getnameinfo() takes the client's address and address length. The address length is
needed because getnameinfo() can work with both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses. We
then pass in an output buffer and buffer length. This is the buffer that
getnameinfo() writes its hostname output to. The next two arguments specify a
second buffer and its length. getnameinfo() outputs the service name to this buffer.
We don't care about that, so we've passed in 0 for those two parameters. Finally,
we pass in the NI_NUMERICHOST flag, which specifies that we want to see the
hostname as an IP address.

As we are programming a web server, we expect the client (for example, a web
browser) to send us an HTTP request. We read this request using the recv()
function:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

      printf("Reading request...\n");
      char request[1024];
      int bytes_received = recv(socket_client, request, 1024, 0);
      printf("Received %d bytes.\n", bytes_received);


We define a request buffer, so that we can store the browser's HTTP request. In
this case, we allocate 1,024 bytes to it, which should be enough for this
application. recv() is then called with the client's socket, the request buffer, and
the request buffer size. recv() returns the number of bytes that are received. If
nothing has been received yet, recv() blocks until it has something. If the
connection is terminated by the client, recv() returns 0 or -1, depending on the
circumstance. We are ignoring that case here for simplicity, but you should
always check that recv() > 0 in production. The last parameter to recv() is for
flags. Since we are not doing anything special, we simply pass in 0.
The request received from our client should follow the proper HTTP protocol.
We will go into detail about HTTP in Chapter 6, Building a Simple Web Client,
and Chapter 7, Building a Simple Web Server, where we will work on web clients
and servers. A real web server would need to parse the request and look at which
resource the web browser is requesting. Our web server only has one function—
to tell us what time it is. So, for now, we just ignore the request altogether.

If you want to print the browser's request to the console, you can do it like this:
      printf("%.*s", bytes_received, request);


Note that we use the printf() format string, "%.*s". This tells printf() that we want
to print a specific number of characters—bytes_received. It is a common mistake
to try printing data that's received from recv() directly as a C string. There is no
guarantee that the data received from recv() is null terminated! If you try to print
it with printf(request) or printf("%s", request), you will likely receive a
segmentation fault error (or at best it will print some garbage).

Now that the web browser has sent its request, we can send our response back:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

      printf("Sending response...\n");
      const char *response =
          "HTTP/1.1 200 OK\r\n"
          "Connection: close\r\n"
          "Content-Type: text/plain\r\n\r\n"
          "Local time is: ";
      int bytes_sent = send(socket_client, response, strlen(response), 0);
      printf("Sent %d of %d bytes.\n", bytes_sent, (int)strlen(response));


To begin with, we set char *response to a standard HTTP response header and the
beginning of our message (Local time is:). We will discuss HTTP in detail in Chapt
er 6, Building a Simple Web Client, and Chapter 7, Building a Simple Web Server.

For now, know that this response tells the browser three things—your request is
OK; the server will close the connection when all the data is sent and the data
you receive will be plain text.

The HTTP response header ends with a blank line. HTTP requires line endings
to take the form of a carriage return character, followed by a newline character.
So, a blank line in our response is \r\n. The part of the string that comes after the
blank line, Local time is:, is treated by the browsers as plain text.
We send the data to the client using the send() function. This function takes the
client's socket, a pointer to the data to be sent, and the length of the data to send.
The last parameter to send() is flags. We don't need to do anything special, so we
pass in 0.

send() returns the number of bytes sent. You should generally check that the
number of bytes sent was as expected, and you should attempt to send the rest if
it's not. We are ignoring that detail here for simplicity. (Also, we are only
attempting to send a few bytes; if send() can't handle that, then something is
probably very broken, and resending won't help.)

After the HTTP header and the beginning of our message is sent, we can send
the actual time. We get the local time the same way we did in time_console.c, and
we send it using send():
  /*time_server.c continued*/

         time_t timer;
         time(&timer);
         char *time_msg = ctime(&timer);
         bytes_sent = send(socket_client, time_msg, strlen(time_msg), 0);
         printf("Sent %d of %d bytes.\n", bytes_sent, (int)strlen(time_msg));


We must then close the client connection to indicate to the browser that we've
sent all of our data:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

         printf("Closing connection...\n");
         CLOSESOCKET(socket_client);


If we don't close the connection, the browser will just wait for more data until it
times out.

At this point, we could call accept() on socket_listen to accept additional
connections. That is exactly what a real server would do. However, as this is just
a quick example program, we will instead close the listening socket too and
terminate the program:
  /*time_server.c continued*/

         printf("Closing listening socket...\n");
         CLOSESOCKET(socket_listen);


  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif


      printf("Finished.\n");

      return 0;
  }


That's the complete program. After you compile and run it, you can navigate a
web browser to it, and it'll display the current time.

On Linux and macOS, you can compile and run the program like this:
  gcc time_server.c -o time_server
  ./time_server


On Windows, you can compile and run with MinGW using these commands:
  gcc time_server.c -o time_server.exe -lws2_32
  time_server


When you run the program, it waits for a connection. You can open a web
browser and navigate to http://127.0.0.1:8080 to load the web page. Recall that
127.0.0.1 is the IPv4 loopback address, which connects to the same machine it's
running on. The :8080 part of the URL specifies the port number to connect to. If
it were left out, your browser would default to port 80, which is the standard for
HTTP connections.

Here is what you should see if you compile and run the program, and then
connect a web browser to it on the same computer:
Here is the web browser connected to our time_server program on port 8080:
Working with IPv6
Please recall the hints.ai_family = AF_INET part of time_server.c near the beginning of
the main() function. If this line is changed to hints.ai_family = AF_INET6, then your
web server listens for IPv6 connections instead of IPv4 connections. This
modified file is included in the GitHub repository as time_server_ipv6.c.

In this case, you should navigate your web browser to http://[::1]:8080 to see the
web page. ::1 is the IPv6 loopback address, which tells the web browser to
connect to the same machine it's running on. In order to use IPv6 addresses in
URLs, you need to put them in square brackets, []. :8080 specifies the port
number in the same way that we did for the IPv4 example.

Here is what you should see when compiling, running, and connecting a web
browser to our time_server_ipv6 program:




Here is the web browser that's connected to our server using an IPv6 socket:
See time_server_ipv6.c for the complete program.
Supporting both IPv4 and IPv6
It is also possible for the listening IPv6 socket to accept IPv4 connections with a
dual-stack socket. Not all operating systems support dual-stack sockets. With
Linux in particular, support varies between distros. If your operating system does
support dual-stack sockets, then I highly recommend implementing your server
programs using this feature. It allows your programs to communicate with both
IPv4 and IPv6 peers while requiring no extra work on your part.

We can modify time_server_ipv6.c to use dual-stack sockets with only a minor
addition. After the call to socket() and before the call to bind(), we must clear the
IPV6_V6ONLY flag on the socket. This is done with the setsockopt() function:


  /*time_server_dual.c excerpt*/

      int option = 0;
      if (setsockopt(socket_listen, IPPROTO_IPV6, IPV6_V6ONLY, (void*)&option, sizeof(option))) {
          fprintf(stderr, "setsockopt() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


We first declare option as an integer and set it to 0. IPV6_V6ONLY is enabled by
default, so we clear it by setting it to 0. setsockopt() is called on the listening
socket. We pass in IPPROTO_IPV6 to tell it what part of the socket we're operating
on, and we pass in IPV6_V6ONLY to tell it which flag we are setting. We then pass in
a pointer to our option and its length. setsockopt() returns 0 on success.

Windows Vista and later supports dual-stack sockets. However, many Windows
headers are missing the definitions for IPV6_V6ONLY. For this reason, it might make
sense to include the following code snippet at the top of the file:
  /*time_server_dual.c excerpt*/

  #if !defined(IPV6_V6ONLY)
  #define IPV6_V6ONLY 27
  #endif


Keep in mind that the socket needs to be initially created as an IPv6 socket. This
is accomplished with the hints.ai_family = AF_INET6 line in our code.

When an IPv4 peer connects to our dual-stack server, the connection is
remapped to an IPv6 connection. This happens automatically and is taken care of
by the operating system. When your program sees the client IP address, it will
still be presented as a special IPv6 address. These are represented by IPv6
addresses where the first 96 bits consist of the prefix—0:0:0:0:0:ffff. The last 32
bits of the address are used to store the IPv4 address. For example, if a client
connects with the IPv4 address 192.168.2.107, then your dual-stack server sees it as
the IPv6 address ::ffff.192.168.2.107.

Here is what it looks like to compile, run, and connect to time_server_dual:




Here is a web browser connected to our time_server_dual program using the
loopback IPv4 address:
Notice that the browser is navigating to the IPv4 address 127.0.0.1, but we can see
on the console that the server sees the connection as coming from the IPv6
address ::ffff:127.0.0.1.

See time_server_dual.c for the complete dual-stack socket server.
Networking with inetd
On Unix-like systems, such as Linux or macOS, a service called inetd can be
used to turn console-only applications into networked ones. You can configure
inetd (with /etc/inetd.conf) with your program's location, port number, protocol
(TCP or UDP), and the user you want it to run as. inetd will then listen for
connections on your desired port. After an incoming connection is accepted by
inetd, it will start your program and redirect all socket input/output through stdin
and stdout.

Using inetd, we could have time_console.c behave like time_server.c with very
minimal changes. We would only need to add in an extra printf() function with
the HTTP response header, read from stdin, and configure inetd.

You may be able to use inetd on Windows through Cygwin or the Windows
Subsystem for Linux.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the basics of using sockets for network
programming. Although there are many differences between Berkeley sockets
(used on Unix-like operating systems) and Winsock sockets (used on Windows),
we mitigated those differences with preprocessor statements. In this way, it was
possible to write one program that compiles cleanly on Windows, Linux, and
macOS.

We covered how the UDP protocol is connectionless and what that means. We
learned that TCP, being a connection-oriented protocol, gives some reliability
guarantees, such as automatically detecting and resending lost packets. We also
saw that UDP is often used for simple protocols (for example, DNS) and for
real-time streaming applications. TCP is used for most other protocols.

After that, we worked through a real example by converting a console
application into a web server. We learned how to write the program using the
getaddrinfo() function, and why that matters for making the program IPv4/IPv6-

agnostic. We used bind(), listen(), and accept() on the server to wait for an
incoming connection from the web browser. Data was then read from the client
using recv(), and a reply was sent using send(). Finally, we terminated the
connection with close() (closesocket() on Windows).

When we built the web server, time_server.c, we covered much ground. It's OK if
you didn't understand all of it. We will revisit many of these functions again
throughout Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections, and the rest of
this book.

In the next chapter, Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections, we
will consider programming for TCP connections in more depth.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge on this chapter:

 1. What is a socket?
 2. What is a connectionless protocol? What is a connection-oriented protocol?
 3. Is UDP a connectionless or connection-oriented protocol?
 4. Is TCP a connectionless or connection-oriented protocol?
 5. What types of applications generally benefit from using the UDP protocol?
 6. What types of applications generally benefit from using the TCP protocol?
 7. Does TCP guarantee that data will be transmitted successfully?
 8. What are some of the main differences between Berkeley sockets and
    Winsock sockets?
 9. What does the bind() function do?
10. What does the accept() function do?
11. In a TCP connection, does the client or the server send application data
    first?

Answers are in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
An In-Depth Overview of TCP
Connections
In Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, we implemented a simple TCP
server that served a web page with HTTP. In this chapter, we will begin by
implementing a TCP client. This client is able to establish an IPv4 or IPv6 TCP
connection with any listening TCP server. It will be a useful debugging tool that
we can reuse in the rest of this book.

Our TCP server from the last chapter was limited to accepting only one
connection. In this chapter, we will look at multiplexing techniques to allow our
programs to handle many separate connections simultaneously.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     Configuring a remote address with getaddrinfo()
     Initiating a TCP connection with connect()
     Detecting terminal input in a non-blocking manner
     Multiplexing with fork()
     Multiplexing with select()
     Detecting peer disconnects
     Implementing a very basic microservice
     The stream-like nature of TCP
     The blocking behavior of send()
Technical requirements
The example programs for this chapter can be compiled with any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW on Windows and GCC on Linux and macOS.
See Appendix B, Setting Up Your C Compiler On Windows, Appendix C, Setting Up
Your C Compiler On Linux, and Appendix D, Setting Up Your C Compiler On
macOS, for compiler setup.

The code for this book can be found in this book's GitHub repository: https://gith
ub.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap03


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
While compiling on Windows, each example program requires that you link with
the Winsock library. This can be accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to
gcc.


We provide the exact commands that are needed to compile each example as it is
introduced.

All of the example programs in this chapter require the same header files and C
macros that we developed in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. For
brevity, we put these statements in a separate header file, chap03.h, which we can
include in each program. For an explanation of these statements, please refer to C
hapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.


The contents of chap03.h is as follows:
  /*chap03.h*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
#include <ws2tcpip.h>
#pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

#else
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/socket.h>
#include <netinet/in.h>
#include <arpa/inet.h>
#include <netdb.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <errno.h>

#endif


#if defined(_WIN32)
#define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
#define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
#define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

#else
#define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
#define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
#define SOCKET int
#define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
#endif


#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
Multiplexing TCP connections
The socket APIs are blocking by default. When you use accept() to wait for an
incoming connection, your program's execution is blocked until a new incoming
connection is actually available. When you use recv() to read incoming data, your
program's execution blocks until new data is actually available.

In the last chapter, we built a simple TCP server. This server only accepted one
connection, and it only read data from that connection once. Blocking wasn't a
problem then, because our server had no other purpose than to serve its one and
only client.

In the general case, though, blocking I/O can be a significant problem. Imagine
that our server from Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, needed to serve
multiple clients. Then, imagine that one slow client connected to it. Maybe this
slow client takes a minute before sending its first data. During this minute, our
server would simply be waiting on the recv() call to return. If other clients were
trying to connect, they would have to wait it out.

Blocking on recv() like this isn't really acceptable. A real application usually
needs to be able to manage several connections simultaneously. This is
obviously true on the server side, as most servers are built to manage many
connected clients. Imagine running a website where hundreds of clients are
connected at once. Serving these clients one at a time would be a non-starter.

Blocking also isn't usually acceptable on the client side either. If you imagine
building a fast web browser, it needs to be able to download many images,
scripts, and other resources in parallel. Modern web browsers also have a tab
feature where many whole web pages can be loaded in parallel.

What we need is a technique for handling many separate connections
simultaneously.
Polling non-blocking sockets
It is possible to configure sockets to use a non-blocking operation. One way to
do this is by calling fcntl() with the O_NONBLOCK flag (ioctlsocket() with
the FIONBIO flag on Windows), although other ways also exist. Once in non-
blocking mode, a call to recv() with no data will return immediately. See Chapter 1
3, Socket Programming Tips and Pitfalls, for more information.


A program structured with this in mind could simply check each of its active
sockets in turn, continuously. It would handle any socket that returned data and
ignore any socket that didn't. This is called polling. Polling can be a waste of
computer resources since most of the time, there will be no data to read. It also
complicates the program somewhat, as the programmer is required to manually
track which sockets are active and which state, they are in. Return values from
recv() must also be handled differently than with blocking sockets.


For these reasons, we won't use polling in this book.
Forking and multithreading
Another possible solution to multiplexing socket connections is to start a new
thread or process for each connection. In this case, blocking sockets are fine, as
they block only their servicing thread/process, and they do not block other
threads/processes. This can be a useful technique, but it also has some
downsides. First of all, threading is tricky to get right. This is especially true if
the connections must share any state between them. It is also less portable as
each operating system provides a different API for these features.

On Unix-based systems, such as Linux and macOS, starting a new process is
very easy. We simply use the fork() function. The fork() function splits the
executing program into two separate processes. A multi-process TCP server may
accept connections like this:
  while(1) {
      socket_client = accept(socket_listen, &new_client, &new_client_length);
      int pid = fork();
      if (pid == 0) { //child process
          close(socket_listen);
          recv(socket_client, ...);
          send(socket_client, ...);
          close(socket_client);
          exit(0);
      }
      //parent process
      close(socket_client);
  }


In this example, the program blocks on accept(). When a new connection is
established, the program calls fork() to split into two processes. The child
process, where pid == 0, only services this one connection. Therefore, the child
process can use recv() freely without worrying about blocking. The parent
process simply calls close() on the new connection and returns to listening for
more connections with accept().

Using multiple processes/threads is much more complicated on Windows.
Windows provides CreateProcess(), CreateThread(), and many other functions for
these features. However—and I can say this objectively—they are all much
harder to use than Unix's fork().
Debugging these multi-process/thread programs can be much more difficult
compared to the single process case. Communicating between sockets and
managing shared state is also much more burdensome. For these reasons, we will
avoid fork() and other multi-process/thread techniques for the rest of this book.

That being said, an example TCP server using fork is included in this chapter's
code. It's named tcp_serve_toupper_fork.c. It does not run on Windows, but it should
compile and run cleanly on Linux and macOS. I would suggest finishing the rest
of this chapter before looking at it.
The select() function
Our preferred technique for multiplexing is to use the select() function. We can
give select() a set of sockets, and it tells us which ones are ready to be read. It
can also tell us which sockets are ready to write to and which sockets have
exceptions. Furthermore, it is supported by both Berkeley sockets and Winsock.
Using select() keeps our programs portable.
Synchronous multiplexing with
select()
The select() function has several useful features. Given a set of sockets, it can be
used to block until any of the sockets in that set is ready to be read from. It can
also be configured to return if a socket is ready to be written to or if a socket has
an error. Additionally, we can configure select() to return after a specified time if
none of these events take place.

The C function prototype for select() is as follows:
  int select(int nfds, fd_set *readfds, fd_set *writefds,
      fd_set *exceptfds, struct timeval *timeout);


Before calling select(), we must first add our sockets into an fd_set. If we have
three sockets, socket_listen, socket_a, and socket_b, we add them to an fd_set, like
this:
  fd_set our_sockets;
  FD_ZERO(&our_sockets);
  FD_SET(socket_listen, &our_sockets);
  FD_SET(socket_a, &our_sockets);
  FD_SET(socket_b, &our_sockets);


It is important to zero-out the fd_set using FD_ZERO() before use.

Socket descriptors are then added to the fd_set one at a time using FD_SET(). A
socket can be removed from an fd_set using FD_CLR(), and we can check for the
presence of a socket in the set using FD_ISSET().

You may see some programs manipulating an fd_set directly. I recommend that
you use only FD_ZERO(), FD_SET(), FD_CLR(), and FD_ISSET() to maintain portability
between Berkeley sockets and Winsock.

select()also requires that we pass a number that's larger than the largest socket
descriptor we are going to monitor. (This parameter is ignored on Windows, but
we will always do it anyway for portability.) We store the largest socket
descriptor in a variable, like this:
  SOCKET max_socket;
  max_socket = socket_listen;
  if (socket_a > max_socket) max_socket = socket_a;
  if (socket_b > max_socket) max_socket = socket_b;


When we call select(), it modifies our fd_set of sockets to indicate which sockets
are ready. For that reason, we want to copy our socket set before calling it. We
can copy an fd_set with a simple assignment like this, and then call select() like
this:
  fd_set copy;
  copy = our_sockets;

  select(max_socket+1, &copy, 0, 0, 0);


This call blocks until at least one of the sockets is ready to be read from. When
select() returns, copy is modified so that it only contains the sockets that are ready
to be read from. We can check which sockets are still in copy using FD_ISSET(), like
this:
  if (FD_ISSET(socket_listen, &copy)) {
      //socket_listen has a new connection
      accept(socket_listen...
  }

  if (FD_ISSET(socket_a, &copy)) {
      //socket_a is ready to be read from
      recv(socket_a...
  }

  if (FD_ISSET(socket_b, &copy)) {
      //socket_b is ready to be read from
      recv(socket_b...
  }


In the previous example, we passed our fd_set as the second argument to select().
If we wanted to monitor an fd_set for writability instead of readability, we would
pass our fd_set as the third argument to select(). Likewise, we can monitor a set
of sockets for exceptions by passing it as the fourth argument to select().
select() timeout
The last argument taken by select() allows us to specify a timeout. It expects a
pointer to struct timeval. The timeval structure is declared as follows:
  struct timeval {
      long tv_sec;
      long tv_usec;
  }


tv_secholds the number of seconds, and tv_usec holds the number of
microseconds (1,000,000th second). If we want select() to wait a maximum of
1.5 seconds, we can call it like this:
  struct timeval timeout;
  timeout.tv_sec = 1;
  timeout.tv_usec = 500000;
  select(max_socket+1, &copy, 0, 0, &timeout);


In this case, select() returns after a socket in fd_set copy is ready to read or after
1.5 seconds has elapsed, whichever is sooner.

If timeout.tv_sec = 0 and timeout.tv_usec = 0, then select() returns immediately (after
changing the fd_set as appropriate). As we saw previously, if we pass in a null
pointer for the timeout parameter, then select() does not return until at least one
socket is ready to be read.

select() can also be used to monitor for writeable sockets (sockets where we
could call send() without blocking), and sockets with exceptions. We can check
for all three conditions with one call:
  select(max_sockets+1, &ready_to_read, &ready_to_write, &excepted, &timeout);


On success, select() itself returns the number of socket descriptors contained in
the (up to) three descriptor sets it monitored. The return value is zero if it timed
out before any sockets were readable/writeable/excepted. select() returns -1 to
indicate an error.
Iterating through an fd_set
We can iterate through an fd_set using a simple for loop. Essentially, we start at 1,
since all socket descriptors are positive numbers, and we continue through to the
largest known socket descriptor in the set. For each possible socket descriptor,
we simply use FD_ISSET() to check if it is in the set. If we wanted to call
CLOSESOCKET() for every socket in the fd_set master, we could do it like this:

  SOCKET i;
  for (i = 1; i <= max_socket; ++i) {
      if (FD_ISSSET(i, &master)) {
          CLOSESOCKET(i);
      }
  }


This may seem like a brute-force approach, and it actually kind of is. However,
these are the tools that we have to work with. FD_ISSET() runs very fast, and it's
likely that processor time spent on other socket operations will dwarf what time
was spent iterating through them in this manner. Nevertheless, you may be able
to optimize this operation by additionally storing your sockets in an array or
linked list. I don't recommend that you make this optimization unless you profile
your code and find the simple for loop iteration to be a significant bottleneck.
select() on non-sockets
On Unix-based systems, select() can also be used on file and terminal I/O, which
can be extremely useful. This doesn't work on Windows, though. Windows only
supports select() for sockets.
A TCP client
It will be useful for us to have a TCP client that can connect to any TCP server.
This TCP client will take in a hostname (or IP address) and port number from the
command line. It will attempt a connection to the TCP server at that address. If
successful, it will relay data that's received from that server to the terminal and
data inputted into the terminal to the server. It will continue until either it is
terminated (with Ctrl + C) or the server closes the connection.

This is useful as a learning opportunity to see how to program a TCP client, but
it is also useful for testing the TCP server programs we develop throughout this
book.

Our basic program flow looks like this:
Our program first uses getaddrinfo() to resolve the server address from the
command-line arguments. Then, the socket is created with a call to socket(). The
fresh socket has connect() called on it to connect to the server. We use select() to
monitor for socket input. select() also monitors for terminal/keyboard input on
non-Windows systems. On Windows, we use the _kbhit() function to detect
terminal input. If terminal input is available, we send it over the socket using
send(). If select() indicated that socket data is available, we read it with recv() and

display it to the terminal. This select() loop is repeated until the socket is closed.
TCP client code
We begin our TCP client by including the header file, chap03.h, which was printed
at the beginning of this chapter. This header file includes the various other
headers and macros we need for cross-platform networking:
  /*tcp_client.c*/

  #include "chap03.h"


On Windows, we also need the conio.h header. This is required for the _kbhit()
function, which helps us by indicating whether terminal input is waiting. We
conditionally include this header, like so:
  /*tcp_client.c*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #include <conio.h>
  #endif


We can then begin the main() function and initialize Winsock:
  /*tcp_client.c*/

  int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


We would like our program to take the hostname and port number of the server it
should connect to as command-line arguments. This makes our program flexible.
We have our program check that these command-line arguments are given. If
they aren't, it displays usage information:
  /*tcp_client.c*/

        if (argc < 3) {
            fprintf(stderr, "usage: tcp_client hostname port\n");
            return 1;
        }


argc   contains the number of argument values available to us. Because the first
argument is always our program's name, we check that there is a total of at least
three arguments. The actual values themselves are stored in argv[].

We then use these values to configure a remote address for connection:
  /*tcp_client.c*/

      printf("Configuring remote address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;
      struct addrinfo *peer_address;
      if (getaddrinfo(argv[1], argv[2], &hints, &peer_address)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


This is similar to how we called getaddrinfo() in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with
Socket APIs. However, in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, we
wanted it to configure a local address, whereas this time, we want it to configure
a remote address.

We set hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM to tell getaddrinfo() that we want a TCP
connection. Remember that we could set SOCK_DGRAM to indicate a UDP connection.

In Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, we also set the family. We don't
need to set the family here, as we can let getaddrinfo() decide if IPv4 or IPv6 is
the proper protocol to use.

For the call to getaddrinfo() itself, we pass in the hostname and port as the first
two arguments. These are passed directly in from the command line. If they
aren't suitable, then getaddrinfo() returns non-zero and we print an error message.
If everything goes well, then our remote address is in the peer_address variable.

            is very flexible about how it takes inputs. The hostname could be a
getaddrinfo()
domain name like example.com or an IP address such as 192.168.17.23 or ::1. The port
can be a number, such as 80, or a protocol, such as http.

After getaddrinfo() configures the remote address, we print it out. This isn't really
necessary, but it is a good debugging measure. We use getnameinfo() to convert the
address back into a string, like this:
  /*tcp_client.c*/
      printf("Remote address is: ");
      char address_buffer[100];
      char service_buffer[100];
      getnameinfo(peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen,
              address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer),
              service_buffer, sizeof(service_buffer),
              NI_NUMERICHOST);
      printf("%s %s\n", address_buffer, service_buffer);


We can then create our socket:
  /*tcp_client.c*/

      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET socket_peer;
      socket_peer = socket(peer_address->ai_family,
              peer_address->ai_socktype, peer_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_peer)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


This call to socket() is done in exactly the same way as it was in Chapter 2, Getting
to Grips with Socket APIs. We use peer_address to set the proper socket family and
protocols. This keeps our program very flexible, as the socket() call creates an
IPv4 or IPv6 socket as needed.

After the socket has been created, we call connect() to establish a connection to
the remote server:
  /*tcp_client.c */

      printf("Connecting...\n");
      if (connect(socket_peer,
                  peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "connect() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }
      freeaddrinfo(peer_address);


connect()takes three arguments—the socket, the remote address, and the remote
address length. It returns 0 on success, so we print an error message if it returns
non-zero. This call to connect() is extremely similar to how we called bind() in Chap
ter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. Where bind() associates a socket with a
local address, connect() associates a socket with a remote address and initiates the
TCP connection.

After we've called connect() with peer_address, we use the freeaddrinfo() function to
free the memory for peer_address.
If we've made it this far, then a TCP connection has been established to the
remote server. We let the user know by printing a message and instructions on
how to send data:
  /*tcp_client.c */

      printf("Connected.\n");
      printf("To send data, enter text followed by enter.\n");


Our program should now loop while checking both the terminal and socket for
new data. If new data comes from the terminal, we send it over the socket. If
new data is read from the socket, we print it out to the terminal.

It is clear we cannot call recv() directly here. If we did, it would block until data
comes from the socket. In the meantime, if our user enters data on the terminal,
that input is ignored. Instead, we use select(). We begin our loop and set up the
call to select(), like this:
  /*tcp_client.c */

      while(1) {

          fd_set reads;
          FD_ZERO(&reads);
          FD_SET(socket_peer, &reads);
  #if !defined(_WIN32)
          FD_SET(0, &reads);
  #endif

          struct timeval timeout;
          timeout.tv_sec = 0;
          timeout.tv_usec = 100000;

          if (select(socket_peer+1, &reads, 0, 0, &timeout) < 0) {
              fprintf(stderr, "select() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
              return 1;
          }


First, we declare a variable, fd_set reads, to store our socket set. We then zero it
with FD_ZERO() and add our only socket, socket_peer.

On non-Windows systems, we also use select() to monitor for terminal input. We
add stdin to the reads set with FD_SET(0, &reads). This works because 0 is the file
descriptor for stdin. Alternatively, we could have used FD_SET(fileno(stdin), &reads)
to the same effect.

The Windows select() function only works on sockets. Therefore, we cannot use
select() to monitor for console input. For this reason, we set up a timeout to the
select() call for 100 milliseconds (100,000 microseconds). If there is no socket
activity after 100 milliseconds, select() returns, and we can check for terminal
input manually.

After select() returns, we check to see whether our socket is set in reads. If it is,
then we know to call recv() to read the new data. The new data is printed to the
console with printf():
  /*tcp_client.c*/

           if (FD_ISSET(socket_peer, &reads)) {
               char read[4096];
               int bytes_received = recv(socket_peer, read, 4096, 0);
               if (bytes_received < 1) {
                   printf("Connection closed by peer.\n");
                   break;
               }
               printf("Received (%d bytes): %.*s",
                       bytes_received, bytes_received, read);
           }


Remember, the data from recv() is not null terminated. For this reason, we use
the %.*s printf() format specifier, which prints a string of a specified length.

     normally returns the number of bytes read. If it returns less than 1, then the
recv()

connection has ended, and we break out of the loop to shut it down.

After checking for new TCP data, we also need to check for terminal input:
  /*tcp_client.c */

  #if defined(_WIN32)
          if(_kbhit()) {
  #else
          if(FD_ISSET(0, &reads)) {
  #endif
              char read[4096];
              if (!fgets(read, 4096, stdin)) break;
              printf("Sending: %s", read);
              int bytes_sent = send(socket_peer, read, strlen(read), 0);
              printf("Sent %d bytes.\n", bytes_sent);
          }


On Windows, we use the _kbhit() function to indicate whether any console input
is waiting. _kbhit() returns non-zero if an unhandled key press event is queued
up. For Unix-based systems, we simply check if select() sets the stdin file
descriptor, 0. If input is ready, we call fgets() to read the next line of input. This
input is then sent over our connected socket with send().
Note that fgets() includes the newline character from the input. Therefore, our
sent input always ends with a newline.

If the socket has closed, send() returns -1. We ignore this case here. This is
because a closed socket causes select() to return immediately, and we notice the
closed socket on the next call to recv(). This is a common paradigm in TCP
socket programming to ignore errors on send() while detecting and handling them
on recv(). It allows us to simplify our program by keeping our connection closing
logic all in one place. Later in this chapter, we will discuss other concerns
regarding send().

This select() based terminal monitoring works very well on Unix-based systems.
It also works equally well if input is piped in. For example, you could use our
TCP client program to send a text file with a command such as cat my_file.txt |
tcp_client 192.168.54.122 8080.


The Windows terminal handling leaves a bit to be desired. Windows does not
provide an easy way to tell whether stdin has input available without blocking, so
we use _kbhit() as a poor proxy. However, if the user presses a non-printable key,
such as an arrow key, it still triggers _kbhit(), even though there is no character to
read. Also, after the first key press, our program will block on fgets() until the
user presses the Enter key. (This doesn't happen on shells that buffer entire lines,
which is common outside of Windows.) This blocking behavior is acceptable,
but you should know that any received TCP data will not display until after that
point. _kbhit() does not work for piped input. Doing proper piped and console
input on Windows is possible, of course, but it's very complicated.

We would need to use separate functions for each (PeekNamedPipe() and
PeekConsoleInput()), and the logic for handling it would be as long as this entire
program! Since handling terminal input isn't the purpose of this book, we're
going to accept _kbhit() function's limitations and move on.

At this point, our program is essentially done. We can end the while loop, close
our socket, and clean up Winsock:
  /*tcp_client.c */

      }

      printf("Closing socket...\n");
      CLOSESOCKET(socket_peer);
  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      printf("Finished.\n");
      return 0;
  }


That's the complete program. You can compile it on Linux and macOS like this:
  gcc tcp_client.c -o tcp_client


Compiling on Windows with MinGW is done like this:
  gcc tcp_client.c -o tcp_client.exe -lws2_32


To run the program, remember to pass in the remote hostname/address and port
number, for example:
  tcp_client example.com 80


Alternatively, you can use the following command:
  tcp_client 127.0.0.1 8080


A fun way to test out the TCP client would be to connect to a live web server and
send an HTTP request. For example, you could connect to example.com on port 80
and send the following HTTP request:
  GET / HTTP/1.1
  Host: example.com


You must then send a blank line to indicate the end of the request. You'll receive
an HTTP response back. It might look something like this:
A TCP server
Microservices have become increasingly popular in recent years. The idea of
microservices is that large programming problems can be split up into many
small subsystems that communicate over a network. For example, if your
program needs to format a string, you could add code to your program to do that,
but writing code is hard. Alternatively, you could keep your program simple and
instead connect to a service that provides string formatting for you. This has the
added advantage that many programs can use this same service without
reinventing the wheel.

Unfortunately, the microservice paradigm has largely avoided the C
ecosystem; until now!

As a motivating example, we are going to build a TCP server that converts
strings into uppercase. If a client connects and sends Hello, then our program will
send HELLO back. This will serve as a very basic microservice. Of course, a real-
world microservice might do something a bit more advanced (such as left-pad a
string), but this to-uppercase service works well for our pedagogical purposes.

For our microservice to be useful, it does need to handle many simultaneous
incoming connections. We again use select() to see which connections need to be
serviced.

Our basic program flow looks like this:
Like in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, our TCP server
uses getaddrinfo() to obtain the local address to listen on. It creates a socket with
socket(), uses bind() to associate the local address to the socket, and uses listen()

to begin listening for new connections. Up until that point, it is essentially
identical to our TCP server from Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.

However, our next step is not to call accept() to wait for new connections.
Instead, we call select(), which alerts us if a new connection is available or if any
of our established connections have new data ready. Only when we know that a
new connection is waiting do we call accept(). All established connections are put
into an fd_set, which is passed to every subsequent select() call. In this same way,
we know which connections would block on recv(), and we only service those
connections that we know will not block.

When data is received by recv(), we run it through toupper() and return it to the
client using send().

This is a complicated program with several new concepts. Don't worry about
understanding all the details right now. The flow is only intended to give you an
overview of what to expect before we dive into the actual code.
TCP server code
Our TCP server code begins by including the needed headers, starting main(), and
initializing Winsock. Refer to Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, if this
doesn't seem familiar:
  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c*/

  #include "chap03.h"
  #include <ctype.h>

  int main() {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


We then get our local address, create our socket, and bind(). This is all done
exactly as explained in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs:
  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c */

      printf("Configuring local address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_family = AF_INET;
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;
      hints.ai_flags = AI_PASSIVE;

      struct addrinfo *bind_address;
      getaddrinfo(0, "8080", &hints, &bind_address);


      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET socket_listen;
      socket_listen = socket(bind_address->ai_family,
              bind_address->ai_socktype, bind_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_listen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


Note that we are going to listen on port 8080. You can, of course, change that.
We're also doing an IPv4 server here. If you want to listen for connections on
IPv6, then just change AF_INET to AF_INET6.
We then bind() our socket to the local address and have it enter a listening state.
Again, this is done exactly as in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs:
  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c*/

      printf("Binding socket to local address...\n");
      if (bind(socket_listen,
                  bind_address->ai_addr, bind_address->ai_addrlen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "bind() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }
      freeaddrinfo(bind_address);

      printf("Listening...\n");
      if (listen(socket_listen, 10) < 0) {
          fprintf(stderr, "listen() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


This is the point where we diverge from our earlier methods. We now define
an fd_set structure that stores all of the active sockets. We also maintain a
max_socket variable, which holds the largest socket descriptor. For now, we add
only our listening socket to the set. Because it's the only socket, it must also be
the largest, so we set max_socket = socket_listen too:
  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c */

      fd_set master;
      FD_ZERO(&master);
      FD_SET(socket_listen, &master);
      SOCKET max_socket = socket_listen;


Later in the program, we will add new connections to master as they are
established.

We then print a status message, enter the main loop, and set up our call to
select():

  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c */

      printf("Waiting for connections...\n");

      while(1) {
          fd_set reads;
          reads = master;
          if (select(max_socket+1, &reads, 0, 0, 0) < 0) {
              fprintf(stderr, "select() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
              return 1;
          }


This works by first copying our fd_set master into reads. Recall that select()
modifies the set given to it. If we didn't copy master, we would lose its data.
We pass a timeout value of 0 (NULL) to select() so that it doesn't return until a
socket in the master set is ready to be read from. At the beginning of our
program, master only contains socket_listen, but as our program runs, we add each
new connection to master.

We now loop through each possible socket and see whether it was flagged by
select() as being ready. If a socket, X, was flagged by select(), then FD_ISSET(X,

&reads) is true. Socket descriptors are positive integers, so we can try every

possible socket descriptor up to max_socket. The basic structure of our loop is as
follows:
  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c */

          SOCKET i;
          for(i = 1; i <= max_socket; ++i) {
              if (FD_ISSET(i, &reads)) {
                  //Handle socket
              }
          }


Remember, FD_ISSET() is only true for sockets that are ready to be read. In the case
of socket_listen, this means that a new connection is ready to be established with
accept(). For all other sockets, it means that data is ready to be read with recv().

We should first determine whether the current socket is the listening one or not.
If it is, we call accept(). This code snippet and the one that follows replace the
//Handle socket comment in the preceding code:


  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c */

                 if (i == socket_listen) {
                     struct sockaddr_storage client_address;
                     socklen_t client_len = sizeof(client_address);
                     SOCKET socket_client = accept(socket_listen,
                             (struct sockaddr*) &client_address,
                             &client_len);
                     if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_client)) {
                         fprintf(stderr, "accept() failed. (%d)\n",
                                 GETSOCKETERRNO());
                         return 1;
                     }

                     FD_SET(socket_client, &master);
                     if (socket_client > max_socket)
                         max_socket = socket_client;

                     char address_buffer[100];
                     getnameinfo((struct sockaddr*)&client_address,
                             client_len,
                             address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer), 0, 0,
                             NI_NUMERICHOST);
                        printf("New connection from %s\n", address_buffer);


If the socket is socket_listen, then we accept() the connection much as we did in Cha
pter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. We use FD_SET() to add the new

connection's socket to the master socket set. This allows us to monitor it with
subsequent calls to select(). We also maintain max_socket. As a final step, this code
prints out the client's address using getnameinfo().

If the socket i is not socket_listen, then it is instead a request for an established
connection. In this case, we need to read it with recv(), convert it into uppercase
using the built-in toupper() function, and send the data back:
  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c */

                  } else {
                      char read[1024];
                      int bytes_received = recv(i, read, 1024, 0);
                      if (bytes_received < 1) {
                          FD_CLR(i, &master);
                          CLOSESOCKET(i);
                          continue;
                      }

                        int j;
                        for (j = 0; j < bytes_received; ++j)
                            read[j] = toupper(read[j]);
                        send(i, read, bytes_received, 0);
                  }


If the client has disconnected, then recv() returns a non-positive number. In this
case, we remove that socket from the master socket set, and we also call
CLOSESOCKET() on it to clean up.


Our program is now almost finished. We can end the if FD_ISSET() statement, end
the for loop, end the while loop, close the listening socket, and clean up Winsock:
  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c */

              } //if FD_ISSET
          } //for i to max_socket
      } //while(1)

      printf("Closing listening socket...\n");
      CLOSESOCKET(socket_listen);

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      printf("Finished.\n");
      return 0;
  }
Our program is set up to continuously listen for connections, so the code after
the end of the while loop will never run. Nevertheless, I believe it is still good
practice to include it in case we program in functionality later to abort the while
loop.

That's the complete to-uppercase microservice TCP server program. You can
compile and run it on Linux and macOS like this:
  gcc tcp_serve_toupper.c -o tcp_serve_toupper
  ./tcp_serve_toupper


Compiling and running on Windows with MinGW is done like this:
  gcc tcp_serve_toupper.c -o tcp_serve_toupper.exe -lws2_32
  tcp_serve_toupper.exe


You can abort the program's execution with Ctrl + C.

Once the program is running, I would suggest opening another terminal and
running the tcp_client program from earlier to connect to it:
  tcp_client 127.0.0.1 8080


Anything you type in tcp_client should be sent back as uppercase. Here's what
this might look like:
As a test of the server program's functionality, try opening several additional
terminals and connecting with tcp_client. Our server should be able to handle
many simultaneous connections.

Also included with this chapter's code is tcp_serve_toupper_fork.c. This program
only runs on Unix-based operating systems, but it performs the same functions
as tcp_serve_toupper.c by using fork() instead of select(). The fork() function is
commonly used by TCP servers, so I think it's helpful to be familiar with it.
Building a chat room
It is also possible, and common, to need to send data between connected clients.
We can modify our tcp_serve_toupper.c program and make it a chat room pretty
easily.

First, locate the following code in tcp_serve_toupper.c:
  /*tcp_serve_toupper.c excerpt*/

                     int j;
                     for (j = 0; j < bytes_received; ++j)
                         read[j] = toupper(read[j]);
                     send(i, read, bytes_received, 0);


Replace the preceding code with the following:
  /*tcp_serve_chat.c excerpt*/

                     SOCKET j;
                     for (j = 1; j <= max_socket; ++j) {
                         if (FD_ISSET(j, &master)) {
                             if (j == socket_listen || j == i)
                                 continue;
                             else
                                 send(j, read, bytes_received, 0);
                         }
                     }


This works by looping through all the sockets in the master set. For each socket, j,
we check that it's not the listening socket and we check that it's not the same
socket that sent the data in the first place. If it's not, we call send() to echo the
received data to it.

You can compile and run this program in the same way as the previous one.

On Linux and macOS, this is done as follows:
  gcc tcp_serve_chat.c -o tcp_serve_chat
  ./tcp_serve_chat


On Windows, this is done as follows:
  gcc tcp_serve_chat.c -o tcp_serve_chat.exe -lws2_32
  tcp_serve_chat.exe
You should open two or more additional windows and connect to it with the
following code:
  tcp_client 127.0.0.1 8080


Whatever you type in one of the tcp_client terminals get sent to all of the other
connected terminals.

Here is an example of what this may look like:
In the preceding screenshot, I am running tcp_serve_chat in the upper-left terminal
windows. The other three terminal windows are running tcp_client. As you can
see, any text entered in one of the tcp_client windows is sent to the server, which
relays it to the other two connected clients.
Blocking on send()
When we call send() with an amount of data, send() first copies this data into an
outgoing buffer provided by the operating system. If we call send() when its
outgoing buffer is already full, it blocks until its buffer has emptied enough to
accept more of our data.

In some cases where send() would block, it instead returns without copying all of
the data as requested. In this case, the return value of send() indicates how many
bytes were actually copied. One example of this is if your program is blocking
on send() and then receives a signal from the operating system. In these cases, it
is up to the caller to try again with any remaining data.

In this chapter's TCP server code section, we ignored the possibility that send()
could block or be interrupted. In a fully robust application, what we need to do is
compare the return value from send() with the number of bytes that we tried to
send. If the number of bytes actually sent is less than requested, we should use
select() to determine when the socket is ready to accept new data, and then call

send() with the remaining data. As you can imagine, this can become a bit
complicated when keeping track of multiple sockets.

As the operating system usually provides a large enough outgoing buffer, we
were able to avoid this possibility with our earlier server code. If we know that
our server may try to send large amounts of data, we should certainly check for
the return value from send().

The following code example assumes that buffer contains buffer_len bytes of data
to send over a socket called peer_socket. This code blocks until we've sent all of
buffer or an error (such as the peer disconnecting) occurs:

  int begin = 0;
  while (begin < buffer_len) {
      int sent = send(peer_socket, buffer + begin, buffer_len - begin, 0);
      if (sent == -1) {
          //Handle error
      }
      begin += sent;
  }
If we are managing multiple sockets and don't want to block, then we should put
all sockets with pending send() into an fd_set and pass it as the third parameter to
select(). When select() signals on these sockets, then we know that they are ready

to send more data.

Chapter 13, Socket Programming Tips and Pitfalls, addresses concerns regarding
the send() function's blocking behavior in more detail.
TCP is a stream protocol
A common mistake beginners make is assuming that any data passed into
send() can be read by recv() on the other end in the same amount. In reality,

sending data is similar to writing and reading from a file. If we write 10 bytes to
a file, followed by another 10 bytes, then the file has 20 bytes of data. If the file
is to be read later, we could read 5 bytes and 15 bytes, or we could read all 20
bytes at once, and so on. In any case, we have no way of knowing that the file
was written in two 10 byte chunks.

Using send() and recv() works the same way. If you send() 20 bytes, it's not
possible to tell how many recv() calls these bytes are partitioned into. It is
possible that one call to recv() could return all 20 bytes, but it is also possible that
a first call to recv() returns 16 bytes and that a second call to recv() is needed to
get the last 4 bytes.

This can make communication difficult. In many protocols, as we will see later
in this book, it is important that received data be buffered up until enough of it
has accumulated to warrant processing. We avoided this issue in this chapter
with our to-uppercase sever by defining a protocol that operates just as well on 1
byte as it does on 100. This isn't true for most application protocols.

For a concrete example, imagine we wanted to make our tcp_serve_toupper server
terminate if it received the quit command through a TCP socket. You could call
send(socket, "quit", 4, 0) on the client and you may think that a call to recv() on
the server would return quit. Indeed, in your testing, it is very likely to work that
way. However, this behavior is not guaranteed. A call to recv() could just as
likely return qui, and a second call to recv() may be required to receive the last t.
If that is the case, consider how you would interpret whether a quit command has
been received. The straightforward way to do it would be to buffer up data that's
received from multiple recv() calls.

We will cover techniques for dealing with recv() buffering in Section 2, An
Overview of Application Layer Protocols, of this book.

In contrast to TCP, UDP is not a stream protocol. With UDP, a packet is received
with exactly the same contents as it was sent with. This can sometimes make
handling UDP somewhat easier, as we will see in Chapter 4, Establishing UDP
Connections.
Summary
TCP really serves as the backbone of the modern internet experience. TCP is
used by HTTP, the protocol that powers websites, and by Simple Mail Transfer
Protocol (SMTP), the protocol that powers email.

In this chapter, we saw that building a TCP client was fairly straightforward. The
only really tricky part was having the client monitor for local terminal input
while simultaneously monitoring for socket data. We were able to accomplish
this with select() on Unix-based systems, but it was slightly trickier on Windows.
Many real-world applications don't need to monitor terminal input, and so this
step isn't always needed.

Building a TCP server that's suitable for many parallel connections wasn't much
harder. Here, select() was extremely useful, as it allowed a straightforward way
of monitoring the listening socket for new connections while also monitoring
existing connections for new data.

We also touched briefly on some common pain points. TCP doesn't provide a
native way to partition data. For more complicated protocols where this is
needed, we have to buffer data from recv() until a suitable amount is available to
interpret. For TCP peers that are handling large amounts of data, buffering to
send() is also necessary.


The next chapter, Chapter 4, Establishing UDP Connections, is all about UDP, the
counterpart to TCP. In some ways, UDP programming is simpler than TCP
programming, but it is also very different.
Questions
Try answering these questions to test your knowledge on this chapter:

 1. How can we tell whether the next call to recv() will block?
 2. How can you ensure that select() doesn't block for longer than a specified
    time?
 3. When we used our tcp_client program to connect to a web server, why did
    we need to send a blank line before the web server responded?
 4. Does send() ever block?
 5. How can we tell whether the socket has been disconnected by our peer?
 6. Is data received by recv() always the same size as data sent with send()?
 7. Consider the following code:
             recv(socket_peer, buffer, 4096, 0);
             printf(buffer);


           What is wrong with it?
           Also see what is wrong with this code:
             recv(socket_peer, buffer, 4096, 0);
             printf("%s", buffer);


The answers can be found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Establishing UDP Connections
In this chapter, we will look at how to send and receive User Datagram
Protocol (UDP) packets. UDP socket programming is very similar
to Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) socket programming, so it is
recommended that you read and understand Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of
TCP Connections, before beginning this one.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     The differences between TCP socket programming and UDP socket
     programming
     The sendto() and recvfrom() functions
     How connect() works on a UDP socket
     Implementing a UDP server using only one socket
     Using select() to tell when a UDP socket has data ready
Technical requirements
The example programs in this chapter can be compiled with any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW on Windows and GCC on Linux and macOS.
See Appendix B, Setting Up Your C Compiler On Windows, Appendix C, Setting Up
Your C Compiler On Linux, and Appendix D, Setting Up Your C Compiler On
macOS, for compiler setup.

The code for this book can be found in this book's GitHub repository: https://gith
ub.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap04


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
While compiling on Windows, each example program requires being linked with
the Winsock library. This can be accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to
gcc.


We provide the exact commands that are needed to compile each example as
they are introduced.

All of the example programs in this chapter require the same header files and C
macros that we developed in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. For
brevity, we put these statements in a separate header file, chap04.h, which we can
include in each program. For an explanation of these statements, please refer to C
hapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.


The content of chap04.h is shown in the following code:
  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")
#else
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/socket.h>
#include <netinet/in.h>
#include <arpa/inet.h>
#include <netdb.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <errno.h>

#endif


#if defined(_WIN32)
#define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
#define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
#define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

#else
#define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
#define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
#define SOCKET int
#define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
#endif


#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
How UDP sockets differ
The socket API for UDP sockets is only very slightly different than what we've
already learned for TCP. In fact, they are similar enough that we can take the
TCP client from the last chapter and turn it into a fully functional UDP client by
changing only one line of code:

 1. Take tcp_client.c from Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections,
    and find the following line of code:
             hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;


 2. Change the preceding code to the following:
             hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_DGRAM;


This modification is included in this chapter's code as udp_client.c.

You can recompile the program using the same commands as before, and you'll
get a fully functional UDP client.

Unfortunately, changing the TCP servers of the previous chapters to UDP won't
be as easy. TCP and UDP server code are different enough that a slightly
different approach is needed.

Also, don't assume that because we had to change only one line of the code that
the client behaves exactly the same way – this won't happen. The two programs
are using a different protocol, after all.

Remember from Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs that UDP does not
try to be a reliable protocol. Lost packets are not automatically re-transmitted,
and packets may be received in a different order than they were sent. It is even
possible for one packet to erroneously arrive twice! TCP attempts to solve all
these problems, but UDP leaves you to your own devices.

Do you know what the best thing about a UDP joke is? I don't care if you get it
or not.
Despite UDP's (lack of) reliability, it is still appropriate for many applications.
Let's look at the methods that are used by UDP clients and servers.
UDP client methods
Sending data with TCP requires calling connect() to set the remote address and
establish the TCP connection. Thus, we use send() with TCP sockets, as shown in
the following code:
  connect(tcp_socket, peer_address, peer_address_length);
  send(tcp_socket, data, data_length, 0);


UDP is a connectionless protocol. Therefore, no connection is established before
sending data. A UDP connection is never established. With UDP, data is simply
sent and received. We can call connect() and then send(), as we mentioned
previously, but the socket API provides an easier way for UDP sockets in the
form of the sendto() function. It works like this:
  sendto(udp_socket, data, data_length, 0,
          peer_address, peer_address_length);


connect()on a UDP socket works a bit differently. All connect() does with a UDP
socket is associate a remote address. Thus, while connect() on a TCP socket
involves a handshake for sending packets over the network, connect() on a UDP
socket only stores an address locally.

So, a UDP client can be structured in two different ways, depending on whether
you use connect(), send(), and recv(), or instead use sendto() and recvfrom().

The following diagram compares the program flow of a TCP Client to a UDP
Client using either method:
Note that, while using connect(), the UDP Client only receives data from the peer
having the IP address and the port that is given to connect(). However, when not
using connect(), the recvfrom() function returns data from any peer that addresses
us! Of course, that peer would need to know our address and port. Unless we call
bind(), our local address and port is assigned automatically by the operating
system.
UDP server methods
Programming a UDP server is a bit different than TCP. TCP requires managing a
socket for each peer connection. With UDP, our program only needs one socket.
That one socket can communicate with any number of peers.

While the TCP program flow required us to use listen() and accept() to wait for
and establish new connections, these functions are not used with UDP. Our UDP
server simply binds to the local address, and then it can immediately start
sending and receiving data.

The program flow of a TCP Server compared to a UDP Server is as follows:
With either a TCP or UDP server, we use select() when we need to check/wait
for incoming data. The difference is that a TCP Server using select() is likely
monitoring many separate sockets, while a UDP Server often only needs to
monitor one socket. If your program uses both TCP and UDP sockets, you can
monitor them all with only one call to select().
A first UDP client/server
To drive these points home, it will be useful to work through a full UDP client
and UDP server program.

To keep things simple, we will create a UDP client program that simply sends
the Hello World string to 127.0.0.1 on port 8080. Our UDP server listens on 8080. It
prints any data it receives, along with the sender's address and port number.

We will begin by implementing the simple UDP server.
A simple UDP server
We will start with the server, since we already have a usable UDP client, that
is, udp_client.c.

Like all of our networked programs, we will begin by including the necessary
headers, starting with the main() function, and initializing Winsock as follows:
  /*udp_recvfrom.c*/

  #include "chap04.h"

  int main() {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


If you've been working through this book in order, this code should be very
routine for you by now. If you haven't, then please refer to Chapter 2, Getting to
Grips with Socket APIs.

Then, we must configure the local address that our server listens on. We use
getaddrinfo() for this, as follows:


  /*udp_recvfrom.c continued*/

      printf("Configuring local address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_family = AF_INET;
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_DGRAM;
      hints.ai_flags = AI_PASSIVE;

      struct addrinfo *bind_address;
      getaddrinfo(0, "8080", &hints, &bind_address);


This differs only slightly from how we've done it before. Notably, we set
hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_DGRAM. Recall that SOCK_STREAM was used there for TCP
connections. We are still setting hints.ai_family = AF_INET here. This makes our
server listen for IPv4 connections. We could change that to AF_INET6 to make our
server listen for IPv6 connections instead.
After we have our local address information, we can create the socket, as
follows:
  /*udp_recvfrom.c continued*/

      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET socket_listen;
      socket_listen = socket(bind_address->ai_family,
              bind_address->ai_socktype, bind_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_listen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


This code is exactly the same as in the TCP case. The call to socket() uses our
address information from getaddrinfo() to create the proper type of socket.

We must then bind the new socket to the local address that we got from
getaddrinfo(). This is as follows:


  /*udp_recvfrom.c continued*/

      printf("Binding socket to local address...\n");
      if (bind(socket_listen,
                  bind_address->ai_addr, bind_address->ai_addrlen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "bind() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }
      freeaddrinfo(bind_address);


Again, that code is exactly the same as in the TCP case.

Here is where the UDP server diverges from the TCP server. Once the local
address is bound, we can simply start to receive data. There is no need to call
listen() or accept(). We listen for incoming data using recvfrom(), as shown here:

  /*udp_recvfrom.c continued*/

      struct sockaddr_storage client_address;
      socklen_t client_len = sizeof(client_address);
      char read[1024];
      int bytes_received = recvfrom(socket_listen,
              read, 1024,
              0,
              (struct sockaddr*) &client_address, &client_len);


In the previous code, we created a struct sockaddr_storage to store the client's
address. We also defined socklen_t client_len to hold the address size. This keeps
our code robust in the case that we change it from IPv4 to IPv6. Finally, we
created a buffer, char read[1024], to store incoming data.
recvfrom()is used in a similar manner to recv(), except that it returns the sender's
address, as well as the received data. You can think of recvfrom() as a combination
of the TCP server accept() and recv().

Once we've received data, we can print it out. Keep in mind that the data may
not be null terminated. It can be safely printed with the %.*s printf() format
specifier, as shown in the following code:
  /*udp_recvfrom.c continued*/

      printf("Received (%d bytes): %.*s\n",
              bytes_received, bytes_received, read);


It may also be useful to print the sender's address and port number. We can use
the getnameinfo() function to convert this data into a printable string, as shown in
the following code:
  /*udp_recvfrom.c continued*/

      printf("Remote address is: ");
      char address_buffer[100];
      char service_buffer[100];
      getnameinfo(((struct sockaddr*)&client_address),
              client_len,
              address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer),
              service_buffer, sizeof(service_buffer),
              NI_NUMERICHOST | NI_NUMERICSERV);
      printf("%s %s\n", address_buffer, service_buffer);


The last argument to getnameinfo() (NI_NUMERICHOST | NI_NUMERICSERV) tells getnameinfo()
that we want both the client address and port number to be in numeric form.
Without this, it would attempt to return a hostname or protocol name if the port
number matches a known protocol. If you do want a protocol name, pass in the
NI_DGRAM flag to tell getnameinfo() that you're working on a UDP port. This is
important for the few protocols that have different ports for TCP and UDP.

It's also worth noting that the client will rarely set its local port number
explicitly. So, the port number returned here by getnameinfo() is likely to be a high
number that's chosen randomly by the client's operating system. Even if the
client did set its local port number, the port number we can see here might have
been changed by network address translation (NAT).

In any case, if our server were to send data back, it would need to send it to the
address and port stored in client_address. This would be done by passing
client_address   to sendto().

Once the data has been received, we'll end our simple UDP server by closing the
connection, cleaning up Winsock, and ending the program:
  /*udp_recvfrom.c continued*/

      CLOSESOCKET(socket_listen);

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      printf("Finished.\n");
      return 0;
  }


You can compile and run udp_recvfrom.c on Linux and macOS by using the
following commands:
  gcc udp_recvfrom.c -o udp_recvfrom
  ./udp_recvfrom


Compiling and running on Windows with MinGW is done as follows:
  gcc udp_recvfrom.c -o udp_recvfrom.exe -lws2_32
  udp_recvfrom.exe


While running, it simply waits for an incoming connection:




You could use udp_client to connect to udp_recvfrom for testing, or you can
implement udp_sendto, which we will do next.
A simple UDP client
Although we've already shown a fairly full-featured UDP client, udp_client.c, it is
worthwhile building a very simple UDP client. This client shows only the
minimal required steps to get a working UDP client, and it uses sendto() instead
of send().

Let's begin the same way we begin each program, by including the necessary
headers, starting main(), and initializing Winsock, as follows:
  /*udp_sendto.c*/

  #include "chap04.h"

  int main() {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


We then configure the remote address using getaddrinfo(). In this minimal
example, we use 127.0.0.1 as the remote address and 8080 as the remote port. This
means that it connects to the UDP server only if it's running on the same
computer.

Here is how the remote address is configured:
  /*udp_sendto.c continued*/

      printf("Configuring remote address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_DGRAM;
      struct addrinfo *peer_address;
      if (getaddrinfo("127.0.0.1", "8080", &hints, &peer_address)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


Notice that we hardcoded 127.0.0.1 and 8080 into the call to getaddrinfo(). Also,
notice that we've set hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_DGRAM. This tells getaddrinfo() that we
are connecting over UDP. Notice that we did not set AF_INET or AF_INET6. This
allows getaddrinfo() to return the appropriate address for IPv4 or IPv6. In this
case, it is IPv4 because the address, 127.0.0.1, is an IPv4 address. We will cover
getaddrinfo() in more detail in Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and DNS.


We can print the configured address using getnameinfo(). The call to getnameinfo() is
the same as in the previous UDP server, udp_recvfrom.c. It works as follows:
  /*udp_sendto.c continued*/

      printf("Remote address is: ");
      char address_buffer[100];
      char service_buffer[100];
      getnameinfo(peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen,
              address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer),
              service_buffer, sizeof(service_buffer),
              NI_NUMERICHOST | NI_NUMERICSERV);
      printf("%s %s\n", address_buffer, service_buffer);


Now that we've stored the remote address, we are ready to create our socket with
a call to socket(). We pass in fields from peer_address to create the appropriate
socket type. The code for this is as follows:
  /*udp_sendto.c continued*/

      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET socket_peer;
      socket_peer = socket(peer_address->ai_family,
              peer_address->ai_socktype, peer_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_peer)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


Once the socket has been created, we can go straight to sending data with
sendto(). There is no need to call connect(). Here is the code to send Hello World to
our UDP server:
  /*udp_sendto.c continued*/

      const char *message = "Hello World";
      printf("Sending: %s\n", message);
      int bytes_sent = sendto(socket_peer,
              message, strlen(message),
              0,
              peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen);
      printf("Sent %d bytes.\n", bytes_sent);


Notice that sendto() is much like send(), except that we need to pass in an address
as the last parameter.
It is also worth noting that we do not get an error back if sending fails.
send() simply tries to send a message, but if it gets lost or is misdelivered along

the way, there is nothing we can do about it. If the message is important, it is up
to the application protocol to implement the corrective action.

After we've sent our data, we could reuse the same socket to send data to another
address (as long as it's the same type of address, which is IPv4 in this case). We
could also try to receive a reply from the UDP server by calling recvfrom(). Note
that if we did call recvfrom() here, we could get data from anybody that sends to
us – not necessarily the server we just transmitted to.

When we sent our data, our socket was assigned with a temporary local port
number by the operating system. This local port number is called the ephemeral
port number. From then on, our socket is essentially listening for a reply on this
local port. If the local port is important, you can use bind() to associate a specific
port before calling send().

If multiple applications on the same system are connecting to a remote server at
the same port, the operating system uses the local ephemeral port number to
keep replies separate. Without this, it wouldn't be possible to know which
application should receive which reply.

We'll end our example program by freeing the memory for peer_address, closing
the socket, cleaning up Winsock, and finishing main(), as follows:
  /*udp_sendto.c continued*/

      freeaddrinfo(peer_address);
      CLOSESOCKET(socket_peer);

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      printf("Finished.\n");
      return 0;
  }


You can compile udp_sendto.c on Linux and macOS using the following
command:
  gcc udp_sendto.c -o udp_sendto


Compiling on Windows with MinGW is done in the following way:
  gcc udp_sendto.c -o udp_sendto.exe -lws2_32


To test it out, first, start udp_recvfrom in a separate terminal. With udp_recvfrom
already running, you can start udp_sendto. It should look as follows:




If no server is running on port 8080, udp_sendto still produces the same output.
udp_sendto doesn't know that the packet was not delivered.
A UDP server
It will be useful to look at a UDP server that's been designed to service many
connections. Fortunately for us, the UDP socket API makes this very easy.

We will take the motivating example from our last chapter, which was to provide
a service that converts all text into uppercase. This is useful because you can
directly compare the UDP code from here to the TCP server code from Chapter 3,
An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections.

Our server begins by setting up the socket and binding to our local address. It
then waits to receive data. Once it has received a data string, it converts the
string into all uppercase and sends it back.

The program flow looks as follows:
If you compare the flow of this program to the TCP server from the last chapter (
Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections), you will find that it's

much simpler. With TCP, we had to use listen() and accept(). With UDP, we skip
those calls and go straight into receiving data with recvfrom(). With our TCP
server, we had to monitor a listening socket for new connections while
simultaneously monitoring an additional socket for each connected client. Our
UDP server only uses one socket, so there is much less to keep track of.

Our UDP server program begins by including the necessary headers, starting the
main() function, and initializing Winsock, as follows:

  /*udp_serve_toupper.c*/

  #include "chap04.h"
  #include <ctype.h>

  int main() {
  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


We then find our local address that we should listen on, create the socket, and
bind to it. This is all exactly the same as in our earlier server, udp_recvfrom.c. The
only difference between this code and the TCP servers in Chapter 3, An In-Depth
Overview of TCP Connections, is that we use SOCK_DGRAM instead of SOCK_STREAM.
Recall that SOCK_DGRAM specifies that we want a UDP socket.

Here is the code for setting the address and creating a new socket:
  /*udp_serve_toupper.c continued*/

      printf("Configuring local address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_family = AF_INET;
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_DGRAM;
      hints.ai_flags = AI_PASSIVE;

      struct addrinfo *bind_address;
      getaddrinfo(0, "8080", &hints, &bind_address);


      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET socket_listen;
      socket_listen = socket(bind_address->ai_family,
              bind_address->ai_socktype, bind_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_listen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }



Binding the new socket to the local address is done as follows:
  /*udp_serve_toupper.c continued*/

      printf("Binding socket to local address...\n");
      if (bind(socket_listen,
                  bind_address->ai_addr, bind_address->ai_addrlen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "bind() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }
      freeaddrinfo(bind_address);


Because our server uses select(), we need to create a new fd_set to store our
listening socket. We zero the set using FD_ZERO(), and then add our socket to this
set using FD_SET(). We also maintain the maximum socket in the set using
max_socket:


  /*udp_serve_toupper.c continued*/

      fd_set master;
      FD_ZERO(&master);
      FD_SET(socket_listen, &master);
      SOCKET max_socket = socket_listen;

      printf("Waiting for connections...\n");


Note that we don't really have to use select() for this program, and omitting it
would make the program simpler (see udp_server_toupper_simple.c). However, we
are going to use select() because it makes our code more flexible. We could
easily add in an additional socket (if we needed to listen on multiple ports, for
example), and we could add in a select() timeout if our program needs to perform
other functions. Of course, our program doesn't do those things, so we don't need
select(), but I think that most programs do, so we will show it that way.


Now, we are ready for the main loop. It copies the socket set into a new variable,
reads, and then uses select() to wait until our socket is ready to read from. Recall

that we could pass in a timeout value as the last parameter to select() if we want
to set a maximum waiting time for the next read. Refer to Chapter 3, An In-Depth
Overview of TCP Connections, the Synchronous multiplexing with select()
section, for more information on select().

Once select() returns, we use FD_ISSET() to tell if our particular socket,
socket_listen, is ready to be read from. If we had additional sockets, we would
need to use FD_ISSET() for each socket.

If FD_ISSET() returns true, we read from the socket using recvfrom(). recvfrom() gives
us the sender's address, so we must first allocate a variable to hold the address,
that is, client_address. Once we've read a string from the socket using recvfrom(),
we convert the string into uppercase using the C toupper() function. We then send
the modified text back to the sender using sendto(). Note that the last two
parameters to sendto() are the client's addresses that we got from recvfrom().

The main program loop can be seen in the following code:
  /*udp_serve_toupper.c continued*/

      while(1) {
         fd_set reads;
         reads = master;
         if (select(max_socket+1, &reads, 0, 0, 0) < 0) {
             fprintf(stderr, "select() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
             return 1;
         }

         if (FD_ISSET(socket_listen, &reads)) {
             struct sockaddr_storage client_address;
             socklen_t client_len = sizeof(client_address);

             char read[1024];
             int bytes_received = recvfrom(socket_listen, read, 1024, 0,
                     (struct sockaddr *)&client_address, &client_len);
             if (bytes_received < 1) {
                 fprintf(stderr, "connection closed. (%d)\n",
                         GETSOCKETERRNO());
                 return 1;
             }

             int j;
             for (j = 0; j < bytes_received; ++j)
                 read[j] = toupper(read[j]);
             sendto(socket_listen, read, bytes_received, 0,
                     (struct sockaddr*)&client_address, client_len);

          } //if FD_ISSET
      } //while(1)


We can then close the socket, clean up Winsock, and terminate the program.
Note that this code never runs, because the main loop never terminates. We
include this code anyway as good practice; in case the program is adapted in the
future to have an exit function.

The cleanup code is as follows:
  /*udp_serve_toupper.c continued*/

      printf("Closing listening socket...\n");
      CLOSESOCKET(socket_listen);

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      printf("Finished.\n");

      return 0;
  }


That's our complete UDP server program. You can compile and run it on Linux
and macOS as follows:
  gcc udp_serve_toupper.c -o udp_serve_toupper
  ./udp_serve_toupper
Compiling and running on Windows with MinGW is done in the following
manner:
  gcc udp_serve_toupper.c -o udp_serve_toupper.exe -lws2_32
  udp_serve_toupper.exe


You can abort the program's execution with Ctrl + C.

Once the program is running, you should open another terminal window and run
the udp_client program from earlier to connect to it, as follows:
  udp_client 127.0.0.1 8080


Anything you type in udp_client should be sent back to it in uppercase. Here's
what that might look like:
You may also want to try opening additional terminal windows and connecting
with udp_client.

See udp_serve_toupper_simple.c for an implementation that doesn't use select(), but
manages to work just as well anyway.
Summary
In this chapter, we saw that programming with UDP sockets is somewhat easier
than with TCP sockets. We learned that UDP sockets don't need the listen(),
accept(), or connect() function calls. This is mostly because sendto() and recvfrom()

deal with the addresses directly. For more complicated programs, we can still use
the select() function to see which sockets are ready for I/O.

We also saw that UDP sockets are connectionless. This is in contrast to
connection-oriented TCP sockets. With TCP, we had to establish a connection
before sending data, but with UDP, we simply send individual packets directly to
a destination address. This keeps UDP socket programming simple, but it can
complicate application protocol design, and UDP does not automatically retry
communication failures or ensure that packets arrive in order.

The next chapter, Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and DNS, is all about
hostnames. Hostnames are resolved using the DNS protocol, which works over
UDP. Move on to Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and DNS, to learn about
implementing a real-world UDP protocol.
Questions
Try answering these questions to test your knowledge of this chapter:

 1. How do sendto() and recvfrom() differ from send() and recv()?
 2. Can send() and recv() be used on UDP sockets?
 3. What does connect() do in the case of a UDP socket?
 4. What makes multiplexing with UDP easier than with TCP?
 5. What are the downsides to UDP when compared to TCP?
 6. Can the same program use UDP and TCP?

The answers can be found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Hostname Resolution and DNS
Hostname resolution is a vital part of network programming. It allows us to use
simple names, such as www.example.com, instead of tedious addresses such
as ::ffff:192.168.212.115. The mechanism that allows us to resolve hostnames into
IP addresses and IP addresses into hostnames is the Domain Name System
(DNS).

In this chapter, we begin by covering the built-in getaddrinfo() and
getnameinfo() socket functions in more depth. Later, we will build a program that

does DNS queries using User Datagram Protocol (UDP) from scratch.

We will cover the following topics in this chapter:

     How DNS works
     Common DNS record types
     The getaddrinfo() and getnameinfo() functions
     DNS query data structures
     DNS UDP protocol
     DNS TCP fallback
     Implementing a DNS query program
Technical requirements
The example programs from this chapter can be compiled with any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW on Windows and GCC on Linux and macOS.
See Appendices B, C, and D for compiler setup.

The code for this book can be found at https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-P
rogramming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap05


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
When compiling on Windows, each example program should be linked with the
Winsock library. This can be accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to gcc.

We'll provide the exact commands needed to compile each example as they are
introduced.

All of the example programs in this chapter require the same header files and C
macros which we developed in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. For
brevity, we put these statements in a separate header file, chap05.h, which we can
include in each program. For an explanation of these statements, please refer to C
hapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.


The contents of chap05.h are as follows:
  /*chap05.h*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

  #else
  #include <sys/types.h>
  #include <sys/socket.h>
  #include <netinet/in.h>
  #include <arpa/inet.h>
  #include <netdb.h>
  #include <unistd.h>
  #include <errno.h>

  #endif


  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

  #else
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
  #define SOCKET int
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
  #endif


  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <string.h>


With the chap05.h header in place, writing portable network programs is much
easier. Let's continue now with an explanation of how DNS works, and then we
will move on to the actual example programs.
How hostname resolution works
The DNS is used to assign names to computers and systems connected to the
internet. Similar to how a phone book can be used to link a phone number to a
name, the DNS allows us to link a hostname to an IP address.

When your program needs to connect to a remote computer, such as
www.example.com, it first needs to find the IP address for www.example.com. In this book

so far, we have been using the built-in getaddrinfo() function for this purpose.
When you call getaddrinfo(), your operating system goes through a number of
steps to resolve the domain name.

First, your operating system checks whether it already knows the IP address for
www.example.com. If you have used that hostname recently, the OS is allowed to

remember it in a local cache for a time. This time is referred to as time-to-live
(TTL) and is set by the DNS server responsible for the hostname.

If the hostname is not found in the local cache, then your operating system will
need to query a DNS server. This DNS server is usually provided by your
Internet Service Provider (ISP), but there are also many publicly-available
DNS servers. When the DNS server receives a query, it also checks its local
cache. This is useful because numerous systems may be relying on one DNS
server. If a DNS server receives 1,000 requests for gmail.com in one minute, it only
needs to resolve the hostname the first time. For the other 999 requests, it can
simply return the memorized answer from its local cache.

If the DNS server doesn't have the requested DNS record in its cache, then it
needs to query other DNS servers until it connects directly to the DNS server
responsible for the target system. Here's an example query resolution broken
down step-wise:

Client A's DNS server is trying to resolve www.example.com as follows:

 1. It first connects to a root DNS server and asks for www.example.com.
 2. The root DNS server directs it to ask the .com server.
 3. Our client's DNS server then connects to the server responsible for .com and
    asks for www.example.com.
 4. The .com DNS server gives our server the address of another server – the
    example.com DNS server.
 5. Our DNS server finally connects to that server and asks about the record for
    www.example.com.
 6. The example.com server then shares the address of www.example.com.
 7. Our client's DNS server relays it back to our client.

The following diagram illustrates this visually:
In this example, you can see that resolving www.example.com involved sending eight
messages. It's possible that the lookup could have taken even longer. This is why
it's imperative for DNS servers to implement caching. Let's assume that Client B
tries the same query shortly after Client A; it's likely that the DNS server would
have that value cached:
Of course, if a program on Client A wants to resolve www.example.com again, it's
likely that it won't have to contact the DNS server at all – the operating system
running on Client A should have cached the result.

On Windows, you can show your local DNS cache with the following command:
  ipconfig /displaydns


On Linux or macOS, the command to show your local DNS varies depending on
your exact system setup.

One downside of setting a large TTL value for a domain record is that you have
to wait at least that long to be sure that all clients are using the new record and
not just retrieving the old cached record.

In addition to DNS records that link a hostname to an IP address, there are other
DNS record types for various purposes. We'll review some of these in the next
section.
DNS record types
The DNS has five main types of records—A, AAAA, MX, TXT, CNAME, and * (ALL/ANY).

As we have learned, the DNS's primary purpose is to translate hostnames into IP
addresses. This is done with two record types – type A and type AAAA. These
records work in the same way, but A records return an IPv4 address, while AAAA
records return an IPv6 address.

The MX record type is used to return mail server information. For example, if you
wanted to send an email to larry@example.com, then the MX record(s) for
example.com would indicate which mail server(s) receives emails for that domain.


TXT records can be used to store arbitrary information for a hostname. In practice,
these are sometimes set to prove ownership of a domain name or to publish
email sending guidelines. The Sender Policy Framework (SPF) standard uses
TXT records to declare which systems are allowed to send mail for a given domain
name. You can read more about SPF at http://www.openspf.org/.

CNAME records can be used to provide an alias for a given name. For example,
many websites are accessible at both their root domain name, for example,
example.com, and at the www subdomain. If example.com and www.example.com should point

to the same address, then an A and an AAAA record can be added for example.com,
while a CNAME record can be added for www.example.com pointing to example.com. Note
that DNS clients don't query for CNAME records directly; instead, a client would ask
for the A or AAAA record for www.example.com and the DNS server would reply with
the CNAME record pointing to example.com. The DNS client would then continue the
query using example.com.

When doing a DNS query, there is also a pseudo-record type called * or ALL or
ANY. If this record is requested from a DNS server, then the DNS server returns all

known record types for the current query. Note that a DNS server is allowed to
respond with only the records in its cache, and this query is not guaranteed (or
even likely) to actually get all of the records for the requested domain.

When sending a DNS query, each record type has an associated type ID. The IDs
for the records discussed so far are as follows:

 Record Type           Type ID (decimal)           Description
 A                     1                           IPv4 address record
 AAAA                  28                          IPv6 address record
 MX                    15                          Mail exchange record
 TXT                   16                          Text record
 CNAME                 5                           Canonical name
 *                     255                         All cached records



There are many other record types in use. Please see the Further reading section
at the end of this chapter for more information.

It should be noted that one hostname may be associated with multiple records of
the same type. For example, example.com could have several A records, each with a
different IPv4 address. This is useful if multiple servers can provide the same
service.

One other aspect of the DNS protocol worth mentioning is security. Let's look at
that now.
DNS security
While most web traffic and email are encrypted today, DNS is still widely used
in an unsecured manner. Protocols do exist to provide security for DNS, but they
are not widely adopted yet. This will hopefully change in the near future.

Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC) are DNS extensions
that provide data authentication. This authentication allows a DNS client to
know that a given DNS reply is authentic, but it does not protect against
eavesdropping.

DNS over HTTPS (DoH) is a protocol that provides name resolution over
HTTPS. HTTPS provides strong security guarantees, including resistance to
interception. We cover HTTPS in Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with
HTTPS and OpenSSL, and Chapter 10, Implementing a Secure Web Server.

What are the implications of using insecure DNS? First, if DNS is not
authenticated, then it could allow an attacker to lie about a domain name's IP
address. This could trick a victim into connecting to a server that they think is
example.com, but, in reality, is a malicious server controlled by the attacker at a

different IP address. If the user is connecting via a secure protocol, such as
HTTPS, then this attack will fail. HTTPS provides additional authentication to
prove server identity. However, if the user connects with an insecure protocol,
such as HTTP, then the DNS attack could successfully trick the victim into
connecting to the wrong server.

If DNS is authenticated, then these hijacking attacks are prevented. However,
without encryption, DNS queries are still susceptible to eavesdropping. This
could potentially give an eavesdropper insight into which websites you're
visiting and other servers that you are connecting to (for example, which email
server you use). This doesn't let an attacker know what you are doing on each
website. For example, if you do a DNS query for example.com, an attacker would
know that you planned to visit example.com, but the attacker would not be able to
determine which resources you requested from example.com – assuming that you
use a secure protocol (for example, HTTPS) to retrieve those resources. An
attacker with the ability to eavesdrop would be able to see that you established a
connection to the IP address of example.com in any case, so them knowing that you
performed a DNS lookup beforehand is not much extra information.

With some security discussion out of the way, let's look at how to do actual DNS
lookups. Winsock and Berkeley sockets provide a simple function to do address
lookup, called getaddrinfo(), which we've used in the previous chapters of this
book. We will start with this in the next section.
Name/address translation functions
It is common for networked programs to need to translate text-based
representatives of an address or hostname into an address structure required by
the socket programming API. The common function we've been using is
getaddrinfo(). It is a useful function because it is highly portable (available on

Windows, Linux, and macOS), and it works for both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.

It is also common to need to convert a binary address back into a text format. We
use getnameinfo() for this.
Using getaddrinfo()
Although we've been using getaddrinfo() in previous chapters, we'll discuss it in
more detail here.

The declaration for getaddrinfo() is shown in the following code:
  int getaddrinfo(const char *node,
                  const char *service,
                  const struct addrinfo *hints,
                  struct addrinfo **res);


The preceding code snippet is explained as follows:

     node specifies a hostname or address as a string. Valid examples could be
     example.com, 192.168.1.1, or ::1.
     service specifies a service or port number as a string. Valid examples could
     be http or 80. Alternately, the null pointer can be passed in for service, in
     which case, the resulting address is set to port 0.

     hintsis a pointer to a struct addrinfo, which specifies options for selecting the
     address. The addrinfo structure has the following fields:
              struct addrinfo {
                  int              ai_flags;
                  int              ai_family;
                  int              ai_socktype;
                  int              ai_protocol;
                  socklen_t        ai_addrlen;
                  struct sockaddr *ai_addr;
                  char            *ai_canonname;
                  struct addrinfo *ai_next;
              };


        You should not assume that the fields are stored in the order listed in the
        previous code, or that additional fields aren't present. There is some
        variation between operating systems.

The call to getaddrinfo() looks at only four fields in *hints. The rest of the structure
should be zeroed-out. The relevant fields are ai_family, ai_socktype, ai_protocol, and
ai_flags:
     ai_family specifies the desired address family. It can be AF_INET for IPv4,
     AF_INET6 for IPv6, or AF_UNSPEC for any address family. AF_UNSPEC is defined as 0.
     ai_socktype could be SOCK_STREAM for TCP (see Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview
     of TCP Connections), or SOCK_DGRAM for UDP (see Chapter 4, Establishing UDP
     Connections). Setting ai_socktype to 0 indicates that the address could be
     used for either.
     ai_protocol should be left to 0. Strictly speaking, TCP isn't the only streaming
     protocol supported by the socket interface, and UDP isn't the only datagram
     protocol supported. ai_protocol is used to disambiguate, but it's not needed
     for our purposes.
     ai_flags specifies additional options about how getaddrinfo() should work.
     Multiple flags can be used by bitwise OR-ing them together. In C, the
     bitwise OR operator uses the pipe symbol, |. So, bitwise OR-ing two flags
     together would use the (flag_one | flag_two) code.

Common flags you may use for the ai_flags field are:

     AI_NUMERICHOST can be used to prevent name lookups. In this case, getaddrinfo()
     would expect node to be an address such as 127.0.0.1 and not a hostname such
     as example.com. AI_NUMERICHOST can be useful because it prevents getaddrinfo()
     from doing a DNS record lookup, which can be slow.
     AI_NUMERICSERV can be used to only accept port numbers for the service
     argument. If used, this flag causes getaddrinof() to reject service names.
     AI_ALL can be used to request both an IPv4 and IPv6 address. The declaration
     for AI_ALL seems to be missing on some Windows setups. It can be defined
     as 0x0100 on those platforms.
     AI_ADDRCONFIG forces getaddrinfo() to only return addresses that match the
     family type of a configured interface on the local machine. For example, if
     your machine is IPv4 only, then using AI_ADDRCONFIG | AI_ALL prevents IPv6
     addresses from being returned. It is usually a good idea to use this flag if
     you plan to connect a socket to the address returned by getaddrinfo().
     AI_PASSIVE can be used with node = 0 to request the wildcard address. This is
     the local address that accepts connections on any of the host's network
     addresses. It is used on servers with bind(). If node is not 0, then AI_PASSIVE has
     no effect. See Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections for
     example usage.

All other fields in hints should be set to 0. You can also pass in 0 for
the hints argument, but different operating systems implement different defaults
in that case.

The final parameter to getaddrinfo(), res, is a pointer to a pointer to struct addrinfo
and returns the address(es) found by getaddrinfo().

If the call to getaddrinfo() succeeds, then its return value is 0. In this case, you
should call freeaddrinfo() on *res when you've finished using the address. Here is
an example of using getaddrinfo() to find the address(es) for example.com:
  struct addrinfo hints;
  memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
  hints.ai_flags = AI_ALL;
  struct addrinfo *peer_address;
  if (getaddrinfo("example.com", 0, &hints, &peer_address)) {
      fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
      return 1;
  }


Note that we first zero out hints using a call to memset(). We then set the AI_ALL
flag, which specifies that we want both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses returned. This
even returns addresses that we don't have a network adapter for. If you only want
addresses that your machine can practically connect to, then use AI_ALL |
AI_ADDRCONFIG for the ai_flags field. We can leave the other fields of hints as their
defaults.

We then declare a pointer to hold the return address list: struct addrinfo
*peer_address.


If the call to getaddrinfo() succeeds, then peer_address holds the first address result.
The next result, if any, is in peer_address->ai_next.

We can loop through all the returned addresses with the following code:
  struct addrinfo *address = peer_address;
  do {
      /* Work with address... */
  } while ((address = address->ai_next));


When we've finished using peer_address, we should free it with the following
code:
  freeaddrinfo(peer_address);


Now that we can convert a text address or name into an addrinfo structure, it is
useful to see how to convert the addrinfo structure back into a text format. Let's
look at that now.
Using getnameinfo()
getnameinfo()can be used to convert an addrinfo structure back into a text format. It
works with both IPv4 and IPv6. It also, optionally, converts a port number into a
text format number or service name.

The declaration for getnameinfo() can be seen in the following code:
  int getnameinfo(const struct sockaddr *addr, socklen_t addrlen,
          char *host, socklen_t hostlen,
          char *serv, socklen_t servlen, int flags);


The first two parameters are passed in from the ai_addr and ai_addrlen fields
of struct addrinfo.

The next two parameters, host and hostlen, specify a character buffer and buffer
length to store the hostname or IP address text.

The following two parameters, serv and servlen, specify the buffer and length to
store the service name.

If you don't need both the hostname and the service, you can optionally pass in
only one of either host or serv.

Flags can be a bitwise OR combination of the following:

     NI_NAMEREQD requires getnameinfo() to return a hostname and not an address. By
     default, getnameinfo() tries to return a hostname but returns an address if it
     can't. NI_NAMEREQD will cause an error to be returned if the hostname cannot be
     determined.
     NI_DGRAM specifies that the service is UDP-based rather than TCP-based. This
     is only important for ports that have different standard services for UDP
     versus TCP. This flag is ignored if NI_NUMERICSERV is set.
     NI_NUMERICHOST requests that getnameinfo() returns the IP address and not a
     hostname.
     NI_NUMERICSERV requests that getnameinfo() returns the port number and not a
     service name.
For example, we can use getnameinfo() as follows:
  char host[100];
  char serv[100];
  getnameinfo(address->ai_addr, address->ai_addrlen,
          host, sizeof(host),
          serv, sizeof(serv),
          0);

  printf("%s %s\n", host, serv);


In the preceding code, getnameinfo() attempts to perform a reverse DNS lookup.
This works like the DNS queries we've done in this chapter so far, but backward.
A DNS query asks which IP address does this hostname point to? A reverse
DNS query asks instead, which hostname does this IP address point to? Keep in
mind that this is not a one-to-one relationship. Many hostnames can point to one
IP address, but an IP address can store a DNS record for only one hostname. In
fact, reverse DNS records are not even set for many IP addresses.

If address is a struct addrinfo with the address for example.com port 80 (http), then the
preceding code might print as follows:
  example.com http


If the code prints something different for you, it's probably working as intended.
It is dependent on which address is in address and how the reverse DNS is set up
for that IP address. Try it with a different address.

If, instead of the hostname, we would like the IP address, we can modify our
code to the following:
  char host[100];
  char serv[100];
  getnameinfo(address->ai_addr, address->ai_addrlen,
          host, sizeof(host),
          serv, sizeof(serv),
          NI_NUMERICHOST | NI_NUMERICSERV);

  printf("%s %s\n", host, serv);


In the case of the previous code, it might print the following:
  93.184.216.34 80


Using NI_NUMERICHOST generally runs much faster too, as it doesn't require
getnameinfo() to send off any reverse DNS queries.
Alternative functions
Two widely-available functions that replicate getaddrinfo() are gethostbyname() and
getservbyname(). The gethostbyname() function is obsolete and has been removed

from the newer POSIX standards. Furthermore, I recommend against using these
functions in new code, because they introduce an IPv4 dependency. It's very
possible to use getaddrinfo() in such a way that your program does not need to be
aware of IPv4 versus IPv6, but still supports both.
IP lookup example program
To demonstrate the getaddrinfo() and getnameinfo() functions, we will implement a
short program. This program takes a name or IP address for its only argument. It
then uses getaddrinfo() to resolve that name or that IP address into an address
structure, and the program prints that IP address using getnameinfo() for the text
conversion. If multiple addresses are associated with a name, it prints each of
them. It also indicates any errors.

To begin with, we need to include our required header for this chapter. We also
define AI_ALL for systems that are missing it. The code for this is as follows:
  /*lookup.c*/

  #include "chap05.h"

  #ifndef AI_ALL
  #define AI_ALL 0x0100
  #endi


We can then begin the main() function and check that the user passed in a
hostname to lookup. If the user doesn't pass in a hostname, we print a helpful
reminder. The code for this is as follows:
  /*lookup.c continued*/

  int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {

      if (argc < 2) {
          printf("Usage:\n\tlookup hostname\n");
          printf("Example:\n\tlookup example.com\n");
          exit(0);
      }


We need the following code to initialize Winsock on Windows platforms:
  /*lookup.c continued*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif
We can then call getaddrinfo() to convert the hostname or address into a struct
addrinfo. The code for that is as follows:


  /*lookup.c continued*/

      printf("Resolving hostname '%s'\n", argv[1]);
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_flags = AI_ALL;
      struct addrinfo *peer_address;
      if (getaddrinfo(argv[1], 0, &hints, &peer_address)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


The previous code first prints the hostname or address that is passed in as the
first command-line argument. This argument is stored in argv[1]. We then
set hints.ai_flags = AI_ALL to specify that we want all available addresses of any
type, including both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.

getaddrinfo() is then called with argv[1]. We pass 0 in for the service argument
because we don't care about the port number. We are only trying to resolve an
address. If argv[1] contains a name, such as example.com, then our operating system
performs a DNS query (assuming the hostname isn't already in the local cache).
If argv[1] contains an address such as 192.168.1.1, then getaddrinfo() simply fills in
the resulting struct addrinfo as needed.

If the user passed in an invalid address or a hostname for which no record could
be found, then getaddrinfo() returns a non-zero value. In that case, our previous
code prints out the error.

Now that peer_address holds the desired address(es), we can use getnameinfo() to
convert them to text. The following code does that:
  /*lookup.c continued*/

      printf("Remote address is:\n");
      struct addrinfo *address = peer_address;
      do {
          char address_buffer[100];
          getnameinfo(address->ai_addr, address->ai_addrlen,
                  address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer),
                  0, 0,
                  NI_NUMERICHOST);
          printf("\t%s\n", address_buffer);
      } while ((address = address->ai_next));


This code works by first storing peer_address in a new variable, address. We then
enter a loop. address_buffer[] is declared to store the text address, and we call
getnameinfo() to fill in that address. The last parameter to getnameinfo(),

NI_NUMERICHOST, indicates that we want it to put the IP address into address_buffer and

not a hostname. The address buffer can then simply be printed out with printf().

If getaddrinfo() returned multiple addresses, then the next address is pointed to by
address->ai_next. We assign address->ai_next to address and loop if it is non-zero. This

is a simple example of walking through a linked list.

After we've printed our address, we should use freeaddrinfo() to free the memory
allocated by getaddrinfo(). We should also call the Winsock cleanup function on
Windows. We can do both with the following code:
  /*lookup.c continued*/

      freeaddrinfo(peer_address);

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      return 0;
  }


That concludes our lookup program.

You can compile and run lookup.c on Linux and macOS by using the following
command:
  gcc lookup.c -o lookup
  ./lookup example.com


Compiling and running on Windows with MinGW is done in the following way:
  gcc lookup.c -o lookup.exe -lws2_32
  lookup.exe example.com


The following screenshot is an example of using lookup to print the IP addresses
for example.com:
Although getaddrinfo() makes performing DNS lookups easy, it is useful to know
what happens behind the scenes. We will now look at the DNS protocol in more
detail.
The DNS protocol
When a client wants to resolve a hostname into an IP address, it sends a DNS
query to a DNS server. This is typically done over UDP using port 53. The DNS
server then performs the lookup, if possible, and returns an answer. The
following diagram illustrates this transaction:




If the query (or, more commonly, the answer) is too large to fit into one UDP
packet, then the query can be performed over TCP instead of UDP. In this case,
the size of the query is sent over TCP as a 16-bit value, and then the query itself
is sent. This is called TCP fallback or DNS transport over TCP. However,
UDP works for most cases, and UDP is how DNS is used the vast majority of the
time.

It's also important to note that the client must know the IP address of at least one
DNS server. If the client doesn't know of any DNS servers, then it has a sort of
chicken-and-egg problem. DNS servers are usually provided by your ISP.

The actual UDP data format is simple and follows the same basic format for both
the query and the answer.
DNS message format
The following illustration describes the DNS message format:




Every DNS message follows that format, although a query would leave the
Answer, Authority, and Additional sections blank. A DNS response commonly
doesn't use Authority or Additional. We won't concern ourselves with the
Authority or Additional sections, as they are not needed for typical DNS
queries.
DNS message header format
The header is exactly 12 bytes long and is exactly the same for a DNS query or
DNS response. The Header Format is illustrated graphically in the following
diagram:




As the preceding diagram illustrates, the DNS message header contains 13 fields
—ID, QR, OPCODE, AA, TC, RD, RA, Z, RCODE, QDCOUNT,
ANCOUNT, NSCOUNT, and ARCOUNT:

    ID is any 16-bit value that is used to identify the DNS message. The client
    is allowed to put any 16 bits into the DNS query, and the DNS server copies
    those same 16 bits into the DNS response ID. This is useful to allow the
    client to match up which response is in reply to which query, in cases where
    the client is sending multiple queries.
    QR is a 1-bit field. It is set to 0 to indicate a DNS query or 1 to indicate a
    DNS response.
    Opcode is a 4-bit field, which specifies the type of query. 0 indicates a
    standard query. 1 indicates a reverse query to resolve an IP address into a
    name. 2 indicates a server status request. Other values (3 through 15) are
    reserved.
    AA indicates an authoritative answer.
    TC indicates that the message was truncated. In this case, it should be re-
    sent using TCP.
    RD should be set if recursion is desired. We leave this bit set to indicate
    that we want the DNS server to contact additional servers until it can
    complete our request.
    RA indicates in a response whether the DNS server supports recursion.
    Z is unused and should be set to 0.

    RCODE is set in a DNS response to indicate the error condition. Its
    possible values are as follows:

RCODE                          Description
0                              No error
1                              Format error
2                              Server failure
3                              Name error
4                              Not implemented
5                              Refused



      Please see RFC 1035: DOMAIN NAMES – IMPLEMENTATION AND
      SPECIFICATION, in the Further reading section of this chapter for more
      information on the meaning of these values.

    QDCOUNT, ANCOUNT, NSCOUNT, and ARCOUNT indicate the
    number of records in their corresponding sections. QDCOUNT indicates
    the number of questions in a DNS query. It is interesting that QDCOUNT
    is a 16-bit value capable of storing large numbers, and yet no real-world
    DNS server allows more than one question per message. ANCOUNT
    indicates the number of answers, and it is common for a DNS server to
    return multiple answers in one message.
Question format
The DNS Question Format consists of a name followed by two 16-bit values
—QTYPE and QCLASS. This Question Format is illustrated as follows:




QTYPE indicates the record type we are asking for, and QCLASS should be set
to 1 to indicate the internet.

The name field involves a special encoding. First, a hostname should be broken
up into its individual labels. For example, www.example.com would be broken up into
www, example, and com. Then, each label should be prepended with 1 byte, indicating

the label length. Finally, the entire name ends with a 0 byte.

Visually, the name www.example.com is encoded as follows:
If the QTYPE and QCLASS fields were appended to the preceding name
example, then it could make up an entire DNS question.

A DNS response is sometimes required to repeat the same name multiple times.
In this case, a DNS server may encode a pointer to an earlier name instead of
sending the same name multiple times. A pointer is indicated by a 16-bit value
with the two most significant bits set. The lower 14 bits indicate the pointer
value. This 14-bit value specifies the location of the name as an offset from the
beginning of the message. Having the two most significant bits reserved has an
additional side-effect of limiting labels to 63 characters. A longer name would
require setting both high bits in the label length specifier, but if both high bits are
set, it indicates a pointer and not a label length!

The answer format is similar to the question format but with a few more fields.
Let's look at that next.
Answer format
The DNS answer format consists of the same three fields that questions have;
namely, a name followed by a 16-bit TYPE and a 16-bit CLASS. The answer format
then has a 32-bit TTL field. This field specifies how many seconds the answer is
allowed to be cached for. TTL is followed by a 16-bit length specifier, RDLENGTH,
followed by data. The data is RDLENGTH long, and the data's interpretation is
dependent upon the type specified by TYPE.

Visually, the answer format is shown in the following diagram:




Keep in mind that most DNS servers use name pointers in their answer names.
This is because the DNS response will have already included the relevant name
in the question section. The answer can simply point back to that, rather than
encoding the entire name a second (or third) time.
Whenever sending binary data over the network, the issue of byte order becomes
relevant. Let's consider this now.
Endianness
The term endianness refers to the order in which individual bytes are stored in
memory or sent over a network.

Whenever we read a multi-byte number from a DNS message, we should be
aware that it's in big-endian format (or so-called network byte order). The
computer you're using likely uses little-endian format, although we are careful to
write our code in an endian-independent manner throughout this book. We
accomplish this by avoiding the conversion of multiple bytes directly to integers,
and instead we interpret bytes one at a time.

For example, consider a message with a single 8-bit value, such as 0x05. We
know that the value of that message is 5. Bytes are sent atomically over a
network link, so we also know that anyone receiving our message can
unambiguously interpret that message as 5.

The issue of endianness comes into play when we need more than one byte to
store our number. Imagine that we want to send the number 999. This number is
too big to fit into 1 byte, so we have to break it up into 2 bytes—a 16-bit value.
Because 999 = (3 * 28) + 231, we know that the high-order byte stores 3 while the
low-order byte stores 231. In hexadecimal, the number 999 is 0x03E7. The question
is whether to send the high-order or the low-order byte over the network first.

Network byte order, which is used by the DNS protocol, specifies that the high-
order byte is sent first. Therefore, the number 999 is sent over the network as a
0x03 followed by 0xE7.


See the Further reading section of this chapter for more information.

Let's now look at encoding an entire DNS query.
A simple DNS query
To perform a simple DNS query, we would put an arbitrary number into ID, set
the RD bit to 1, and set QDCOUNT to 1. We would then add a question after the header.
That data would be sent as a UDP packet to port 53 of a DNS server.

A hand-constructed DNS for example.com in C is as follows:
  char dns_query[] = {0xAB, 0xCD,                           /* ID */
                      0x01, 0x00,                           /* Recursion */
                      0x00, 0x01,                           /* QDCOUNT */
                      0x00, 0x00,                           /* ANCOUNT */
                      0x00, 0x00,                           /* NSCOUNT */
                      0x00, 0x00,                           /* ARCOUNT */
                      7, 'e', 'x', 'a', 'm', 'p', 'l', 'e', /* label */
                      3, 'c', 'o', 'm',                     /* label */
                      0,                                    /* End of name */
                      0x00, 0x01,                           /* QTYPE = A */
                      0x00, 0x01                            /* QCLASS */
                      };


This data could be sent as is to a DNS server over port 53.

The DNS server, if successful, sends a UDP packet back as a response. This
packet has ID set to match our query. QR is set to indicate a response. QDCOUNT is set
to 1, and our original question is included. ANCOUNT is some small positive integer
that indicates the number of answers included in the message.

In the next section, we'll implement a program to send and receive DNS
messages.
A DNS query program
We will now implement a utility to send DNS queries to a DNS server and
receive the DNS response.

This should not normally be needed in the field. It is, however, a good
opportunity to better understand the DNS protocol and to get experience of
sending binary UDP packets.

We begin with a function to print a name from a DNS message.
Printing a DNS message name
DNS encodes names in a particular way. Normally, each label is indicated by its
length, followed by its text. A number of labels can be repeated, and then the
name is terminated with a single 0 byte.

If a length has its two highest bits set (that is, 0xc0), then it and the next byte
should be interpreted as a pointer instead.

We must also be aware at all times that the DNS response from the DNS server
could be ill-formed or corrupted. We must try to write our program in such a
way that it won't crash if it receives a bad message. This is easier said than done.

The declaration for our name-printing function looks like this:
  /*dns_query.c*/

  const unsigned char *print_name(const unsigned char *msg,
          const unsigned char *p, const unsigned char *end);


We take msg to be a pointer to the message's beginning, p to be a pointer to the
name to print, and end to be a pointer to one past the end of the message. end is
required so that we can check that we're not reading past the end of the received
message. msg is required for the same reason, but also so that we can interpret
name pointers.

Inside the print_name function, our code checks that a proper name is even
possible. Because a name should consist of at least a length and some text, we
can return an error if p is already within two characters of the end. The code for
that check is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      if (p + 2 > end) {
          fprintf(stderr, "End of message.\n"); exit(1);}


We then check to see if p points to a name pointer. If it does, we interpret the
pointer and call print_name recursively to print the name that is pointed to. The
code for this is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      if ((*p & 0xC0) == 0xC0) {
          const int k = ((*p & 0x3F) << 8) + p[1];
          p += 2;
          printf(" (pointer %d) ", k);
          print_name(msg, msg+k, end);
          return p;


Note that 0xC0 in binary is 0b11000000. We use (*p & 0xC0) == 0xC0 to check for a
name pointer. In that case, we take the lower 6 bits of *p and all 8 bits of p[1] to
indicate the pointer. We know that p[1] is still within the message because of our
earlier check that p was at least 2 bytes from the end. Knowing the name pointer,
we can pass a new value of p to print_name().

If the name is not a pointer, we simply print it one label at a time. The code for
printing the name is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      } else {
          const int len = *p++;
          if (p + len + 1 > end) {
              fprintf(stderr, "End of message.\n"); exit(1);}

          printf("%.*s", len, p);
          p += len;
          if (*p) {
              printf(".");
              return print_name(msg, p, end);
          } else {
              return p+1;
          }
      }


In the preceding code, *p is read into len to store the length of the current label.
We are careful to check that reading len + 1 bytes doesn't put us past the end of
the buffer. We can then print the next len characters to the console. If the next
byte isn't 0, then the name is continued, and we should print a dot to separate the
labels. We call print_name() recursively to print the next label of the name.

If the next byte is 0, then that means the name is finished and we return.

That concludes the print_name() function.

Now we will devise a function that prints an entire DNS message.
Printing a DNS message
Using print_name() that we have just defined, we can now construct a function to
print an entire DNS message to the screen. DNS messages share the same format
for both the request and the response, so our function is able to print either.

The declaration for our function is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

  void print_dns_message(const char *message, int msg_length);


                 takes a pointer to the start of the message, and an int data type
print_dns_message()
indicates the message's length.

Inside print_dns_message(), we first check that the message is long enough to be a
valid DNS message. Recall that the DNS header is 12 bytes long. If a DNS
message is less than 12 bytes, we can easily reject it as an invalid message. This
also ensures that we can read at least the header without worrying about reading
past the end of the received data.

The code for checking the DNS message length is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      if (msg_length < 12) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Message is too short to be valid.\n");
          exit(1);
      }


We then copy the message pointer into a new variable, msg. We define msg as an
unsigned char pointer, which makes certain calculations easier to work with.

  /*dns_query.c*/

      const unsigned char *msg = (const unsigned char *)message;


If you want to print out the entire raw DNS message, you can do that with the
following code:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      int i;
      for (i = 0; i < msg_length; ++i) {
          unsigned char r = msg[i];
          printf("%02d:   %02X %03d '%c'\n", i, r, r, r);
      }
      printf("\n");


Be aware that running the preceding code will print out many lines. This can be
annoying, so I would recommend using it only if you are curious about seeing
the raw DNS message.

The message ID can be printed very easily. Recall that the message ID is simply
the first two bytes of the message. The following code prints it in a nice
hexadecimal format:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      printf("ID = %0X %0X\n", msg[0], msg[1]);


Next, we get the QR bit from the message header. This bit is the most significant
bit of msg[2]. We use the bitmask 0x80 to see whether it is set. If it is, we know that
the message is a response; otherwise, it's a query. The following code reads QR
and prints a corresponding message:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      const int qr = (msg[2] & 0x80) >> 7;
      printf("QR = %d %s\n", qr, qr ? "response" : "query");


The OPCODE, AA, TC, and RD fields are read in much the same way as QR. The code for
printing them is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      const int opcode = (msg[2] & 0x78) >> 3;
      printf("OPCODE = %d ", opcode);
      switch(opcode) {
          case 0: printf("standard\n"); break;
          case 1: printf("reverse\n"); break;
          case 2: printf("status\n"); break;
          default: printf("?\n"); break;
      }

      const int aa = (msg[2] & 0x04) >> 2;
      printf("AA = %d %s\n", aa, aa ? "authoritative" : "");

      const int tc = (msg[2] & 0x02) >> 1;
      printf("TC = %d %s\n", tc, tc ? "message truncated" : "");

      const int rd = (msg[2] & 0x01);
      printf("RD = %d %s\n", rd, rd ? "recursion desired" : "");
Finally, we can read in RCODE for response-type messages. Since RCODE can have
several different values, we use a switch statement to print them. Here is the code
for that:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      if (qr) {
          const int rcode = msg[3] & 0x07;
          printf("RCODE = %d ", rcode);
          switch(rcode) {
              case 0: printf("success\n"); break;
              case 1: printf("format error\n"); break;
              case 2: printf("server failure\n"); break;
              case 3: printf("name error\n"); break;
              case 4: printf("not implemented\n"); break;
              case 5: printf("refused\n"); break;
              default: printf("?\n"); break;
          }
          if (rcode != 0) return;
      }


The next four fields in the header are the question count, the answer count, the
name server count, and the additional count. We can read and print them in the
following code:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      const int qdcount = (msg[4] << 8) + msg[5];
      const int ancount = (msg[6] << 8) + msg[7];
      const int nscount = (msg[8] << 8) + msg[9];
      const int arcount = (msg[10] << 8) + msg[11];

      printf("QDCOUNT = %d\n", qdcount);
      printf("ANCOUNT = %d\n", ancount);
      printf("NSCOUNT = %d\n", nscount);
      printf("ARCOUNT = %d\n", arcount);


That concludes reading the DNS message header (the first 12 bytes).

Before reading the rest of the message, we define two new variables as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      const unsigned char *p = msg + 12;
      const unsigned char *end = msg + msg_length;


In the preceding code, the p variable is used to walk through the message. We set
the end variable to one past the end of the message. This is to help us detect
whether we're about to read past the end of the message – a situation we
certainly wish to avoid!
We read and print each question in the DNS message with the following code:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      if (qdcount) {
          int i;
          for (i = 0; i < qdcount; ++i) {
              if (p >= end) {
                  fprintf(stderr, "End of message.\n"); exit(1);}

              printf("Query %2d\n", i + 1);
              printf(" name: ");

              p = print_name(msg, p, end); printf("\n");

              if (p + 4 > end) {
                  fprintf(stderr, "End of message.\n"); exit(1);}

              const int type = (p[0] << 8) + p[1];
              printf(" type: %d\n", type);
              p += 2;

              const int qclass = (p[0] << 8) + p[1];
              printf(" class: %d\n", qclass);
              p += 2;
          }
      }


Although no real-world DNS server will accept a message with multiple
questions, the DNS RFC does clearly define the format to encode multiple
questions. For that reason, we make our code loop through each question using a
for loop. First, the print_name() function, which we defined earlier, is called to
print the question name. We then read in and print out the question type and
class.

Printing the answer, authority, and additional sections is slightly more difficult
than the question section. These sections start the same way as the question
section – with a name, a type, and a class. The code for reading the name, type,
and class is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      if (ancount || nscount || arcount) {
          int i;
          for (i = 0; i < ancount + nscount + arcount; ++i) {
              if (p >= end) {
                  fprintf(stderr, "End of message.\n"); exit(1);}

              printf("Answer %2d\n", i + 1);
              printf(" name: ");

              p = print_name(msg, p, end); printf("\n");

              if (p + 10 > end) {
                    fprintf(stderr, "End of message.\n"); exit(1);}

              const int type = (p[0] << 8) + p[1];
              printf(" type: %d\n", type);
              p += 2;

              const int qclass = (p[0] << 8) + p[1];
              printf(" class: %d\n", qclass);
              p += 2;


Note that, in the preceding code, we stored the class in a variable called qclass.
This is to be nice to our C++ friends, who are not allowed to use class as a
variable name.

We then expect to find a 16-bit TTL field, and a 16-bit data length field. The
TTL field tells us how many seconds we are allowed to cache an answer for. The
data length field tells us how many bytes of additional data are included for the
answer. We read TTL and the data length in the following code:
  /*dns_query.c*/

              const unsigned int ttl = (p[0] << 24) + (p[1] << 16) +
                  (p[2] << 8) + p[3];
              printf("   ttl: %u\n", ttl);
              p += 4;

              const int rdlen = (p[0] << 8) + p[1];
              printf(" rdlen: %d\n", rdlen);
              p += 2;


Before we can read in the data of the rdlen length, we should check that we won't
read past the end of the message. The following code achieves that:
  /*dns_query.c*/

              if (p + rdlen > end) {
                  fprintf(stderr, "End of message.\n"); exit(1);}


We can then try to interpret the answer data. Each record type stores different
data. We need to write code to display each type. For our purposes, we limit this
to the A, MX, AAAA, TXT, and CNAME records. The code to print each type is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

              if (rdlen == 4 && type == 1) { /* A Record */
                  printf("Address ");
                  printf("%d.%d.%d.%d\n", p[0], p[1], p[2], p[3]);

              } else if (type == 15 && rdlen > 3) { /* MX Record */
                  const int preference = (p[0] << 8) + p[1];
                  printf(" pref: %d\n", preference);
                  printf("MX: ");
                    print_name(msg, p+2, end); printf("\n");

              } else if (rdlen == 16 && type == 28) { /* AAAA Record */
                  printf("Address ");
                  int j;
                  for (j = 0; j < rdlen; j+=2) {
                      printf("%02x%02x", p[j], p[j+1]);
                      if (j + 2 < rdlen) printf(":");
                  }
                  printf("\n");

              } else if (type == 16) { /* TXT Record */
                  printf("TXT: '%.*s'\n", rdlen-1, p+1);

              } else if (type == 5) { /* CNAME Record */
                  printf("CNAME: ");
                  print_name(msg, p, end); printf("\n");
              }
              p += rdlen;


We can then finish the loop. We check that all the data was read and print a
message if it wasn't. If our program is correct, and if the DNS message is
properly formatted, we should have read all the data with nothing left over. The
following code checks this:
  /*dns_query.c*/

          }
      }

      if (p != end) {
          printf("There is some unread data left over.\n");
      }

      printf("\n");


That concludes the print_dns_message() function.

We can now define our main() function to create the DNS query, send it to a DNS
server, and await a response.
Sending the query
We start main() with the following code:
  /*dns_query.c*/

  int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {

      if (argc < 3) {
          printf("Usage:\n\tdns_query hostname type\n");
          printf("Example:\n\tdns_query example.com aaaa\n");
          exit(0);
      }

      if (strlen(argv[1]) > 255) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Hostname too long.");
          exit(1);
      }


The preceding code checks that the user passed in a hostname and record type to
query. If they didn't, it prints a helpful message. It also checks that the hostname
isn't more than 255 characters long. Hostnames longer than that aren't allowed
by the DNS standard, and checking it now ensures that we don't need to allocate
too much memory.

We then try to interpret the record type requested by the user. We support the
following options – a, aaaa, txt, mx, and any. The code to read in those types and
store their corresponding DNS integer value is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      unsigned char type;
      if (strcmp(argv[2], "a") == 0) {
          type = 1;
      } else if (strcmp(argv[2], "mx") == 0) {
          type = 15;
      } else if (strcmp(argv[2], "txt") == 0) {
          type = 16;
      } else if (strcmp(argv[2], "aaaa") == 0) {
          type = 28;
      } else if (strcmp(argv[2], "any") == 0) {
          type = 255;
      } else {
          fprintf(stderr, "Unknown type '%s'. Use a, aaaa, txt, mx, or any.",
                  argv[2]);
          exit(1);
      }


Like all of our previous programs, we need to initialize Winsock. The code for
that is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


Our program connects to 8.8.8.8, which is a public DNS server run by Google.
Refer to Chapter 1, An Introduction to Networks and Protocols, Domain Names,
for a list of additional public DNS servers you can use.

Recall that we are connecting on UDP port 53. We use getaddrinfo() to set up the
required structures for our socket with the following code:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      printf("Configuring remote address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_DGRAM;
      struct addrinfo *peer_address;
      if (getaddrinfo("8.8.8.8", "53", &hints, &peer_address)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


We then create our socket using the data returned from getaddrinfo(). The
following code does that:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET socket_peer;
      socket_peer = socket(peer_address->ai_family,
              peer_address->ai_socktype, peer_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_peer)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


Our program then constructs the data for the DNS query message. The first 12
bytes compose the header and are known at compile time. We can store them
with the following code:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      char query[1024] = {0xAB, 0xCD, /* ID */
                          0x01, 0x00, /* Set recursion */
                         0x00, 0x01, /* QDCOUNT */
                         0x00, 0x00, /* ANCOUNT */
                         0x00, 0x00, /* NSCOUNT */
                         0x00, 0x00 /* ARCOUNT */};


The preceding code sets our query's ID to 0xABCD, sets a recursion request, and
indicates that we are attaching 1 question. As mentioned earlier, 1 is the only
number of questions supported by real-world DNS servers.

We then need to encode the user's desired hostname into the query. The
following code does that:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      char *p = query + 12;
      char *h = argv[1];

      while(*h) {
          char *len = p;
          p++;
          if (h != argv[1]) ++h;

          while(*h && *h != '.') *p++ = *h++;
          *len = p - len - 1;
      }

      *p++ = 0;


The preceding code first sets a new pointer, p, to the end of the query header. We
will be adding to the query starting at p. We also define a pointer, h, which we
use to loop through the hostname.

We can loop while *h != 0 because *h is equal to zero when we've finished
reading the hostname. Inside the loop, we use the len variable to store the
position of the label beginning. The value in this position needs to be set to
indicate the length of the upcoming label. We then copy characters from *h to *p
until we find a dot or the end of the hostname. If either is found, the code sets
*len equal to the label length. The code then loops into the next label.


Finally, outside the loop, we add a terminating 0 byte to finish the name section
of the question.

We then add the question type and question class to the query with the following
code:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      *p++ = 0x00; *p++ = type; /* QTYPE */
      *p++ = 0x00; *p++ = 0x01; /* QCLASS */


We can then calculate the query size by comparing p to the query beginning. The
code for figuring the total query size is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      const int query_size = p - query;


Now, with the query message formed, and its length known, we can use sendto()
to transmit the DNS query to the DNS server. The code for sending the query is
as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      int bytes_sent = sendto(socket_peer,
              query, query_size,
              0,
              peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen);
      printf("Sent %d bytes.\n", bytes_sent);


For debugging purposes, we can also display the query we sent with the
following code:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      print_dns_message(query, query_size);


The preceding code is useful to see whether we've made any mistakes in
encoding our query.

Now that the query has been sent, we await a DNS response message using
recvfrom(). In a practical program, you may want to use select() here to time out.
It could also be wise to listen for additional messages in the case that an invalid
message is received first.

The code to receive and display the DNS response is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      char read[1024];
      int bytes_received = recvfrom(socket_peer,
              read, 1024, 0, 0, 0);

      printf("Received %d bytes.\n", bytes_received);

      print_dns_message(read, bytes_received);
      printf("\n");
We can finish our program by freeing the address(es) from getaddrinfo() and
cleaning up Winsock. The code to complete the main() function is as follows:
  /*dns_query.c*/

      freeaddrinfo(peer_address);
      CLOSESOCKET(socket_peer);

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      return 0;
  }


That concludes the dns_query program.

You can compile and run dns_query.c on Linux and macOS by running the
following command:
  gcc dns_query.c -o dns_query
  ./dns_query example.com a


Compiling and running on Windows with MinGW is done by using the
following command:
  gcc dns_query.c -o dns_query.exe -lws2_32
  dns_query.exe example.com a


Try running dns_query with different domain names and different record types. In
particular, try it with mx and txt records. If you're brave, try running it with the
any record type. You may find the results interesting.


The following screenshot is an example of using dns_query to query the A record of
example.com:
The next screenshot shows dns_query querying the mx record of gmail.com:
Note that UDP is not always reliable. If our DNS query is lost in transit, then
dns_query hangs while waiting forever for a reply that never comes. This could be

fixed by using the select() function to time out and retry.
Summary
This chapter was all about hostnames and DNS queries. We covered how the
DNS works, and we learned that resolving a hostname can involve many UDP
packets being sent over the network.

We looked at getaddrinfo() in more depth and showed why it is usually the
preferred way to do a hostname lookup. We also looked at its sister function,
getnameinfo(), which is capable of converting an address to text or even doing a
reverse DNS query.

Finally, we implemented a program that sent DNS queries from scratch. This
program was a good learning experience to better understand the DNS protocol,
and it gave us a chance to gain experience in implementing a binary protocol.
When implementing a binary protocol, we had to pay special attention to byte
order. For the simple DNS message format, this was achieved by carefully
interpreting bytes one at a time.

Now that we've worked with a binary protocol, DNS, we will move on to text-
based protocols in the next few chapters. In the next chapter, we will learn about
HTTP, the protocol used to request and retrieve web pages.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge of this chapter:

 1. Which function fills in an address needed for socket programming in a
    portable and protocol-independent way?
 2. Which socket programming function can be used to convert an IP address
    back into a name?
 3. A DNS query converts a name into an address, and a reverse DNS query
    converts an address back into a name. If you run a DNS query on a name,
    and then a reverse DNS query on the resulting address, do you always get
    back the name you started with?
 4. What are the DNS record types used to return IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for a
    name?
 5. Which DNS record type stores special information about email servers?
 6. Does getaddrinfo() always return immediately? or can it block?
 7. What happens when a DNS response is too large to fit into a single UDP
    packet?

The answers are in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Further reading
For more information about DNS, please refer to:

    RFC 1034: DOMAIN NAMES – CONCEPTS AND FACILITIES (https://too
    ls.ietf.org/html/rfc1034)
    RFC 1035: DOMAIN NAMES – IMPLEMENTATION AND
    SPECIFICATION (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1035)
    RFC 3596: DNS Extensions to Support IP Version 6 (https://tools.ietf.org/ht
    ml/rfc3596)
Section 2 - An Overview of
Application Layer Protocols
In this section, the reader will learn about two of the most common higher-level
protocols, HTTP and SMTP, which build on top of TCP.

The following chapters are in this section:

        , Building a Simple Web Client
Chapter 6


        , Building a Simple Web Server
Chapter 7


        , Building a Program to Send Emails
Chapter 8
Building a Simple Web Client
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the application protocol that powers
the World Wide Web (WWW). Whenever you fire up your web browser to do an
internet search, browse Wikipedia, or make a post on social media, you are using
HTTP. Many mobile apps also use HTTP behind the scenes. It's safe to say that
HTTP is one of the most widely used protocols on the internet.

In this chapter, we will look at the HTTP message format. We will then
implement a C program, which can request and receive web pages.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     The HTTP message format
     HTTP request types
     Common HTTP headers
     HTTP response code
     HTTP message parsing
     Implementing an HTTP client
     Encoding form data (POST)
     HTTP file uploads
Technical requirements
The example programs from this chapter can be compiled with any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW on Windows and GCC on Linux and macOS.
See appendices B, C, and D for compiler setup.

The code for this book can be found at https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-P
rogramming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap06


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
When compiling on Windows, each example program requires linking with the
Winsock library. This is accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to gcc.

We provide the exact commands needed to compile each example as they are
introduced.

All of the example programs in this chapter require the same header files and C
macros that we developed in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. For
brevity, we put these statements in a separate header file, chap06.h, which we can
include in each program. For an explanation of these statements, please refer to C
hapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.


The content of chap06.h is as follows:
  //chap06.h//

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

  #else
  #include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/socket.h>
#include <netinet/in.h>
#include <arpa/inet.h>
#include <netdb.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <errno.h>

#endif


#if defined(_WIN32)
#define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
#define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
#define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

#else
#define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
#define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
#define SOCKET int
#define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
#endif


#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <clock.h>
The HTTP protocol
HTTP is a text-based client-server protocol that runs over TCP. Plain HTTP runs
over TCP port 80.

It should be noted that plain HTTP is mostly deprecated for security reasons.
Today, sites should use HTTPS, the secure version of HTTP. HTTPS secures
HTTP by merely running the HTTP protocol through a Transport Layer
Security (TLS) layer. Therefore, everything we cover in this chapter regarding
HTTP also applies to HTTPS. See Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with
HTTPS and OpenSSL, for more information about HTTPS.

HTTP works by first having the web client send an HTTP request to the web
server. Then, the web server responds with an HTTP response. Generally, the
HTTP request indicates which resource the client is interested in, and the HTTP
response delivers the requested resource.

Visually, the transaction is illustrated in the following graphic:




The preceding graphic illustrates a GET request. A GET request is used when
the Web Client simply wants the Web Server to send it a document, image, file,
web page, and so on. GET requests are the most common. They are what your
browser sends to a Web Server while loading up a web page or downloading a
file.

There are a few other request types that are also worth mentioning.
HTTP request types
Although GET requests are the most common, there are, perhaps, three request
types that are commonly used. The three common HTTP request types are as
follows:

     GET is used when the client wants to download a resource.
     HEAD is just like GET, except that the client only wants information about the
     resource instead of the resource itself. For example, if the client only wants
     to know the size of a hosted file, it could send a HEAD request.
     POST is used when the client needs to send information to the server. Your
     web browser typically uses a POST request when you submit an online form,
     for example. A POST request will typically cause a web server to change its
     state somehow. A web server could send an email, update a database, or
     change a file in response to a POST request.

In addition to GET, HEAD, and POST, there are a few more HTTP request types that are
rarely used. They are as follows:

     PUT is used to send a document to the web server. PUT is not commonly used.
     POST is almost universally used to change the web server state.
     DELETE is used to request that the web server should delete a document or
     resource. Again, in practice, DELETE is rarely used. POST is commonly used to
     communicate web server updates of all types.
     TRACE is used to request diagnostic information from web proxies. Most web
     requests don't go through a proxy, and many web proxies don't fully support
     TRACE. Therefore, it's rare to need to use TRACE.
     CONNECT is sometimes used to initiate an HTTP connection through a proxy
     server.
     OPTIONS is used to ask which HTTP request types are supported by the server
     for a given resource. A typical web server that implements OPTIONS may
     respond with something similar to Allow: OPTIONS, GET, HEAD, POST. Many
     common web servers don't support OPTIONS.

If you send a request that the web server doesn't support, then the server should
respond with a 400 Bad Request code.
Now that we've seen the types of HTTP requests, let's look at the request format
in more detail.
HTTP request format
If you open your web browser and navigate to http://www.example.com/page1.htm,
your browser will need to send an HTTP request to the web server at
www.example.com. That HTTP request may look like this:

  GET /page1.htm HTTP/1.1
  User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64) AppleWebKit/537.36
  Accept-Language: en-US
  Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*/*;q=0.8
  Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate
  Host: example.com
  Connection: Keep-Alive


As you can see, the browser sends a GET request by default. This GET request is
asking the server for the document /page1.htm. A GET request consists of HTTP
headers only. There is no HTTP body because the client isn't sending data to the
server. The client is only requesting data from the server. In contrast, a POST
request would contain an HTTP body.

The first line of an HTTP request is called the request line. The request line
consists of three parts – the request type, the document path, and the protocol
version. Each part is separated by a space. In the preceding example, the request
line is GET /page1.htm HTTP/1.1. We can see that the request type is GET, the document
path is /page1.htm, and the protocol version is HTTP/1.1.

When dealing with text-based network protocols, it is always important to be
explicit about line endings. This is because different operating systems have
standardized on different line-ending conventions. Each line of an HTTP
message ends with a carriage return, followed by a newline character. In C, this
looks like \r\n. In practice, some web servers may tolerate other line endings.
You should ensure that your clients always send a proper \r\n line ending for
maximum compatibility.

After the request line, there are various HTTP header fields. Each header field
consists of its name followed by a colon, and then its value. Consider the User-
Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64) AppleWebKit/537.36 line. This User-Agent
line is telling the web server what software is contacting it. Some web servers
will serve different documents to different user agents. For example, it is
common for some websites to serve full documents to search engine spiders
while serving paywalls to actual visitors. The server generally uses the user-
agent HTTP header field to determine which is which. At the same time, there is
a long history of web clients lying in the user-agent field. I suggest you take the
high road in your applications and clearly identify your application with a unique
user-agent value.

The only header field that is actually required is Host. The Host field tells the web
server which web host the client is requesting the resource from. This is
important because one web server may be hosting many different websites. The
request line tells the web server that the /page1.htm document is wanted, but it
doesn't specify which server that page is on. The Host field fills this role.

The Connection: Keep-Alive line tells the web server that the HTTP client would like
to issue additional requests after the current request finishes. If the client had
sent Connection: Close instead, that would indicate that the client intended to close
the TCP connection after the HTTP response was received.

The web client must send a blank line after the HTTP request header. This blank
line is how the web server knows that the HTTP request is finished. Without this
blank line, the web server wouldn't know whether any additional header fields
were still going to being sent. In C, the blank line looks like this: \r\n\r\n.

Let's now consider what the web server would send in reply to an HTTP request.
HTTP response format
Like the HTTP request, the HTTP response also consists of a header part and a
body part. Also similar to the HTTP request, the body part is optional. Most
HTTP responses do have a body part, though.

The server at www.example.com could respond to our HTTP request with the
following reply:
  HTTP/1.1 200 OK
  Cache-Control: max-age=604800
  Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
  Date: Fri, 14 Dec 2018 16:46:09 GMT
  Etag: "1541025663+gzip"
  Expires: Fri, 21 Dec 2018 16:46:09 GMT
  Last-Modified: Fri, 09 Aug 2013 23:54:35 GMT
  Server: ECS (ord/5730)
  Vary: Accept-Encoding
  X-Cache: HIT
  Content-Length: 1270

  <!doctype html>
  <html>
  <head>
      <title>Example Domain</title>
  ...


The first line of an HTTP response is the status line. The status line consists of
the protocol version, the response code, and the response code description. In the
preceding example, we can see that the protocol version is HTTP/1.1, the response
code is 200, and the response code description is OK. 200 OK is the typical response
code to an HTTP GET request when everything goes ok. If the server couldn't find
the resource the client has requested, it might respond with a 404 Page Not Found
response code instead.

Many of the HTTP response headers are used to assist with caching. The Date,
Etag, Expires, and Last-Modified fields can all be used by the client to cache
documents.

The Content-Type field tells the client what type of resource it is sending. In the
preceding example, it is an HTML web page, which is specified with text/html.
HTTP can be used to send all types of resources, such as images, software, and
videos. Each resource type has a specific Content-Type, which tells the client how
to interpret the resource.

The Content-Length field specifies the size of the HTTP response body in bytes. In
this case, we see that the requested resource is 1270 bytes long. There are a few
ways to determine the body length, but the Content-Length field is the simplest. We
will look at other ways in the Response Body Length section later in this chapter.

The HTTP response header section is delineated from the HTTP response body
by a blank line. After this blank line, the HTTP body follows. Note that the
HTTP body is not necessarily text-based. For example, if the client requested an
image, then the HTTP body would likely be binary data. Also consider that, if
the HTTP body is text-based, such as an HTML web page, it is free to use its
own line-ending convention. It doesn't have to use the \r\n line ending required
by HTTP.

If the client had sent a HEAD request type instead of GET, then the server would
respond with exactly the same HTTP headers as before, but it would not include
the HTTP body.

With the HTTP response format defined, let's look at some of the most common
HTTP response types.
HTTP response codes
There are many different types of HTTP response codes.

If the request was successful, then the server responds with a code in the 200
range:

          : The client's request is successful, and the server sends the requested
     200 OK
     resource

If the resource has moved, the server can respond with a code in the 300 range.
These codes are commonly used to redirect traffic from an unencrypted
connection to an encrypted one, or to redirect traffic from a www subdomain to a
bare one. They are also used if a website has undergone restructuring, but wants
to keep incoming links working. The common 300 range codes are as follows:

     301 Moved Permanently: The requested resource has moved to a new location.
     This location is indicated by the server in the Location header field. All
     future requests for this resource should use this new location.
     307 Moved Temporarily: The requested resource has moved to a new location.
     This location is indicated by the server in the Location header field. This
     move may not be permanent, so future requests should still use the original
     location.

Errors are indicated by 400 or 500 range response codes. Some common ones
are as follows:

     400 Bad Request : The server doesn't understand/support the client's request
     401 Unauthorized: The client isn't authorized for the requested resource
     403 Forbidden: The client is forbidden to access the requested resource
     500 Internal Server Error: The server encountered an error while trying to
     fulfill the client's request

In addition to a response type, the HTTP server must also be able to
unambiguously communicate the length of the response body.
Response body length
The HTTP body response length can be determined a few different ways. The
simplest is if the HTTP server includes a Content-Length header line in its response.
In that case, the server simply states the body length directly.

If the server would like to begin sending data before the body's length is known,
then it can't use the Content-Length header line. In this case, the server can send a
Transfer-Encoding: chunked header line. This header line indicates to the client that
the response body will be sent in separate chunks. Each chunk begins with its
chunk length, encoded in base-16 (hexadecimal), followed by a newline, and
then the chunk data. The entire HTTP body ends with a zero-length chunk.

Let's consider an HTTP response example that uses chunked encoding:
  HTTP/1.1 200 OK
  Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ascii
  Transfer-Encoding: chunked

  44
  Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eius
  37
  mod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
  0


In the preceding example, we see the HTTP body starts with 44 followed by a
newline. This 44 should be interpreted as hexadecimal. We can use the built-in C
strtol() function to interpret hexadecimal numbers.


Hexadecimal numbers are commonly written with a 0x prefix to disambiguate
them from decimal. We identify them with this prefix here, but keep in mind that
the HTTP protocol does not add this prefix.

The 0x44 hexadecimal number is equal to 68 in decimal. After the 44 and newline,
we see 68 characters that are part of the requested resource. After the 68
character chunk, the server sends a newline.

The server then sent 37. 0x37 is 55 in decimal. After a newline, 55 characters are
sent as chunk data. The server then sends a zero-length chunk to indicate that the
response is finished.
The client should interpret the complete HTTP response after it has decoded the
chunking as Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.


There are a few other ways to indicate the HTTP response body length
besides Content-Length and Transfer-Encoding: chunked. However, the server is limited
to those two unless the client explicitly states support for additional encoding
types in the HTTP request.

You may sometimes see a server that simply closes the TCP connection when it
has finished transmitting a resource. That was a common way to indicate
resource size in HTTP/1.0. However, this method shouldn't be used with HTTP/1.1.
The issue with using a closed connection to indicate response length is that it's
ambiguous as to why the connection was closed. It could be because all data has
been sent, or it could be because of some other reason. Consider what would
happen if a network cable is unplugged while data is being sent.

Now that we've seen the basics of HTTP requests and responses, let's look at
how web resources are identified.
What's in a URL
Uniform Resource Locators (URL), also known as web addresses, provide a
convenient way to specify particular web resources. You can navigate to a URL
by typing it into your web browser's address bar. Alternately, if you're browsing
a web page and click on a link, that link is indicated with a URL.

Consider the http://www.example.com:80/res/page1.php?user=bob#account URL. Visually,
the URL can be broken down like this:




The URL can indicate the protocol, the host, the port number, the document path,
and hash. However, the host is the only required part. The other parts can be
implied.

We can parse the example URL from the preceding diagram:

     http://: The part before the first :// indicates the protocol. In this example,
     the protocol is http, but it could be a different protocol such as ftp:// or
     https://. If the protocol is omitted, the application will generally make an
     assumption. For example, your web browser would assume the protocol to
     be http.
     www.example.com: This specifies the hostname. It is used to resolve an IP
     address that the HTTP client can connect to. This hostname must also
     appear in the HTTP request Host header field. This is required since multiple
     hostnames can resolve to the same IP address. This part can also be an IP
     address instead of a name. IPv4 addresses are used directly
     (http://192.168.50.1/), but IPv6 addresses should be put inside square
    brackets (http://[::1]/).
    :80: The port number can be specified explicitly by using a colon after the
    hostname. If the port number is not specified, then the client uses the
    default port number for the given protocol. The default port number for
    http is 80, and the default port number for https is 443. Non-standard port
    numbers are common for testing and development.
    /res/page1.php?user/bob: This specifies the document path. The HTTP
    server usually makes a distinction between the part before and after the
    question mark, but the HTTP client should not assign significance to this.
    The part after the question mark is often called the query string.
    #account: This is called the hash. The hash specifies a position within a
    document, and the hash is not sent to the HTTP server. It instead allows a
    browser to scroll to a particular part of a document after the entire
    document is received from the HTTP server.

Now that we have a basic understanding of URLs, let's write code to parse them.
Parsing a URL
We will write a C function to parse a given URL.

The function takes as input a URL, and it returns as output the hostname, the
port number, and the document path. To avoid needing to do manual memory
management, the outputs are returned as pointers to specific parts of the input
URL. The input URL is modified with terminating null pointers as required.

Our function begins by printing the input URL. This is useful for debugging.
The code for that is as follows:
  /*web_get.c excerpt*/

  void parse_url(char *url, char **hostname, char **port, char** path) {
      printf("URL: %s\n", url);


The function then attempts to find :// in the URL. If found, it reads in the first
part of the URL as a protocol. Our program only supports HTTP. If the given
protocol is not HTTP, then an error is returned. The code for parsing the protocol
is as follows:
  /*web_get.c excerpt*/

      char *p;
      p = strstr(url, "://");

      char *protocol = 0;
      if (p) {
          protocol = url;
          *p = 0;
          p += 3;
      } else {
          p = url;
      }

      if (protocol) {
          if (strcmp(protocol, "http")) {
              fprintf(stderr,
                      "Unknown protocol '%s'. Only 'http' is supported.\n",
                      protocol);
              exit(1);
          }
      }


In the preceding code, a character pointer, p, is declared. protocol is also declared
and set to 0 to indicate that no protocol has been found. strstr() is called to
search for :// in the URL. If it is not found, then protocol is left at 0, and p is set to
point back to the beginning of the URL. However, if :// is found, then protocol is
set to the beginning of the URL, which contains the protocol. p is set to one after
://, which should be where the hostname begins.


If protocol was set, the code then checks that it points to the text http.

At this point in the code, p points to the beginning of the hostname. The code can
save the hostname into the return variable, hostname. The code must then scan for
the end of the hostname by looking for the first colon, slash, or hash. The code
for this is as follows:
  /*web_get.c excerpt*/

      *hostname = p;
      while (*p && *p != ':' && *p != '/' && *p != '#') ++p;


Once p has advanced to the end of the hostname, we must check whether a port
number was found. A port number starts with a colon. If a port number is found,
our code returns it in the port variable; otherwise, a default port number of 80 is
returned. The code to check for a port number is as follows:
  /*web_get.c excerpt*/

      *port = "80";
      if (*p == ':') {
          *p++ = 0;
          *port = p;
      }
      while (*p && *p != '/' && *p != '#') ++p;


After the port number, p points to the document path. The function returns this
part of the URL in the path variable. Note that our function omits the first / in the
path. This is for simplicity because it allows us to avoid allocating any memory.
All document paths start with /, so the function caller can easily prepend that
when the HTTP request is constructed.

The code to set the path variable is as follows:
  /*web_get.c excerpt*/

      *path = p;
      if (*p == '/') {
          *path = p + 1;
      }
      *p = 0;
The code then attempts to find a hash, if it exists. If it does exist, it is overwritten
with a terminating null character. This is because the hash is never sent to the
web server and is ignored by our HTTP client.

The code that advances to the hash is as follows:
  /*web_get.c excerpt*/

      while (*p && *p != '#') ++p;
      if (*p == '#') *p = 0;


Our function has now parsed out the hostname, port number, and document path.
It then prints out these values for debugging purposes and returns. The final code
for the parse_url() function is as follows:
  /*web_get.c excerpt*/

      printf("hostname: %s\n", *hostname);
      printf("port: %s\n", *port);
      printf("path: %s\n", *path);
  }


Now that we have code to parse a URL, we are one step closer to building an
entire HTTP client.
Implementing a web client
We will now implement an HTTP web client. This client takes as input a URL. It
then attempts to connect to the host and retrieve the resource given by the URL.
The program displays the HTTP headers that are sent and received, and it
attempts to parse out the requested resource content from the HTTP response.

Our program begins by including the chapter header, chap06.h:
  /*web_get.c*/

  #include "chap06.h"


We then define a constant, TIMEOUT. Later in our program, if an HTTP response is
taking more than TIMEOUT seconds to complete, then our program abandons the
request. You can define TIMEOUT as you like, but we give it a value of five seconds
here:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

  #define TIMEOUT 5.0


Now, please include the entire parse_url() function as given in the previous
section. Our client needs parse_url() to find the hostname, port number, and
document path from a given URL.

Another helper function is used to format and send the HTTP request. We call it
send_request(), and its code is given next:

  /*web_get.c continued*/

  void send_request(SOCKET s, char *hostname, char *port, char *path) {
      char buffer[2048];

      sprintf(buffer, "GET /%s HTTP/1.1\r\n", path);
      sprintf(buffer + strlen(buffer), "Host: %s:%s\r\n", hostname, port);
      sprintf(buffer + strlen(buffer), "Connection: close\r\n");
      sprintf(buffer + strlen(buffer), "User-Agent: honpwc web_get 1.0\r\n");
      sprintf(buffer + strlen(buffer), "\r\n");

      send(s, buffer, strlen(buffer), 0);
      printf("Sent Headers:\n%s", buffer);
  }
send_request() works by first defining a character buffer in which to store the
HTTP request. It then uses the sprintf() function to write to the buffer until the
HTTP request is complete. The HTTP request ends with a blank line. This blank
line tells the server that the entire request header has been received.

Once the request is formatted into buffer, buffer is sent over an open socket using
send(). buffer is also printed to the console for debugging purposes. We define one

more helper function for our web client. This function, connect_to_host(), takes in
a hostname and port number and attempts to establish a new TCP socket
connection to it.

In the first part of connect_to_host(), getaddrinfo() is used to resolve the hostname.
getnameinfo() is then used to print out the server IP address for debugging
purposes. The code for this is as follows:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

  SOCKET connect_to_host(char *hostname, char *port) {
      printf("Configuring remote address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;
      struct addrinfo *peer_address;
      if (getaddrinfo(hostname, port, &hints, &peer_address)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }

      printf("Remote address is: ");
      char address_buffer[100];
      char service_buffer[100];
      getnameinfo(peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen,
              address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer),
              service_buffer, sizeof(service_buffer),
              NI_NUMERICHOST);
      printf("%s %s\n", address_buffer, service_buffer);


In the second part of connect_to_host(), a new socket is created with socket(), and a
TCP connection is established with connect(). If everything goes well, the
function returns the created socket. The code for the second half of
connect_to_host() is as follows:


  /*web_get.c continued*/

      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET server;
      server = socket(peer_address->ai_family,
              peer_address->ai_socktype, peer_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(server)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }

      printf("Connecting...\n");
      if (connect(server,
                  peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "connect() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }
      freeaddrinfo(peer_address);

      printf("Connected.\n\n");

      return server;
  }


If you've been working through this book from the beginning, the code in
connect_to_host() should be very familiar by now. If it's not, please refer to the

previous chapters for a more detailed explanation of getaddrinfo(), socket(), and
connect(). Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections, should be

particularly helpful.

With our helper functions out of the way, we can now begin to define the main()
function. We begin main() with the following code:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

  int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


      if (argc < 2) {
          fprintf(stderr, "usage: web_get url\n");
          return 1;
      }
      char *url = argv[1];


In the preceding code, Winsock is initialized, if needed, and the program's
arguments are checked. If a URL is given as an argument, it is stored in
the url variable.

We can then parse the URL into its hostname, port, and path parts with the
following code:
  /*web_get.c continued*/
      char *hostname, *port, *path;
      parse_url(url, &hostname, &port, &path);


The program then continues by establishing a connection to the target server and
sending the HTTP request. This is made easy by using the two helper functions
we defined previously, connect_to_host() and send_request(). The code for this is as
follows:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

      SOCKET server = connect_to_host(hostname, port);
      send_request(server, hostname, port, path);


One feature of our web client is that it times out if a request takes too long to
complete. In order to know how much time has elapsed, we need to record the
start time. This is done using a call to the built-in clock() function. We store the
start time in the start_time variable with the following:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

      const clock_t start_time = clock();


It is now necessary to define some more variables that can be used for
bookkeeping while receiving and parsing the HTTP response. The requisite
variables are as follows:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

  #define RESPONSE_SIZE 8192
      char response[RESPONSE_SIZE+1];
      char *p = response, *q;
      char *end = response + RESPONSE_SIZE;
      char *body = 0;

      enum {length, chunked, connection};
      int encoding = 0;
      int remaining = 0;


In the preceding code, RESPONSE_SIZE is the maximum size of the HTTP response
we reserve memory for. Our program is unable to parse HTTP responses bigger
than this. If you extend this limit, it may be useful to use malloc() to reserve
memory on the heap instead of the stack.

responseis a character array that holds the entire HTTP response. p is a char
pointer that keeps track of how far we have written into response so far. q is an
additional char pointer that is used later. We define end as a char pointer, which
points to the end of the response buffer. end is useful to ensure that we don't
attempt to write past the end of our reserved memory.

The body pointer is used to remember the beginning of the HTTP response body
once received.

If you recall, the HTTP response body length can be determined by a few
different methods. We define an enumeration to list the method types, and we
define the encoding variable to store the actual method used. Finally, the remaining
variable is used to record how many bytes are still needed to finish the HTTP
body or body chunk.

We then start a loop to receive and process the HTTP response. This loop first
checks that it hasn't taken too much time and that we still have buffer space left
to store the received data. The first part of this loop is as follows:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

      while(1) {

          if ((clock() - start_time) / CLOCKS_PER_SEC > TIMEOUT) {
              fprintf(stderr, "timeout after %.2f seconds\n", TIMEOUT);
              return 1;
          }

          if (p == end) {
              fprintf(stderr, "out of buffer space\n");
              return 1;
          }


We then include the code to receive data over the TCP socket. Our code uses
select() with a short timeout. This allows us to periodically check that the request

hasn't timed out. You may recall from previous chapters that select() involves
creating fd_set and timeval structures. The following code creates these objects
and calls select():
  /*web_get.c continued*/

          fd_set reads;
          FD_ZERO(&reads);
          FD_SET(server, &reads);

          struct timeval timeout;
          timeout.tv_sec = 0;
          timeout.tv_usec = 200000;

          if (select(server+1, &reads, 0, 0, &timeout) < 0) {
              fprintf(stderr, "select() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
              return 1;
          }
select()returns when either the timeout has elapsed, or new data is available to
be read from the socket. Our code needs to use FD_ISSET() to determine whether
new data is available to be read. If so, we read the data into the buffer at
the p pointer.

Alternatively, when attempting to read new data, we may find that the socket
was closed by the web server. If this is the case, we check whether we were
expecting a closed connection to indicate the end of the transmission. That is the
case if encoding == connection. If so, we print the HTTP body data that was
received.

The code for reading in new data and detecting a closed connection is as follows:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

           if (FD_ISSET(server, &reads)) {
               int bytes_received = recv(server, p, end - p, 0);
               if (bytes_received < 1) {
                   if (encoding == connection && body) {
                       printf("%.*s", (int)(end - body), body);
                   }

                  printf("\nConnection closed by peer.\n");
                  break;
              }

              /*printf("Received (%d bytes): '%.*s'",
                      bytes_received, bytes_received, p);*/

              p += bytes_received;
              *p = 0;


Note that, in the preceding code, the p pointer is advanced to point to the end of
received data. *p is set to zero, so our received data always ends with a null
terminator. This allows us to use standard functions on the data that expect a
null-terminated string. For example, we use the built-in strstr() function to
search through the received data, and strstr() expects the input string to be null-
terminated.

Next, if the HTTP body hasn't already been found, our code searches through the
received data for a blank line that indicates the end of the HTTP header. A blank
line is encoded by two consecutive line endings. HTTP defines a line ending as
\r\n, so our code detects a blank line by searching for \r\n\r\n.


The following code finds the end of the HTTP header (which is the beginning of
the HTTP body) using strstr(), and updates the body pointer to point to the
beginning of the HTTP body:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

              if (!body && (body = strstr(response, "\r\n\r\n"))) {
                  *body = 0;
                  body += 4;


It may be useful to print the HTTP header for debugging. This can be done with
the following code:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

                  printf("Received Headers:\n%s\n", response);


Now that the headers have been received, we need to determine whether the
HTTP server is using Content-Length or Transfer-Encoding: chunked to indicate body
length. If it doesn't send either, then we assume that the entire HTTP body has
been received once the connection is closed.

If the Content-Length is found using strstr(), we set encoding = length and store the
body length in the remaining variable. The actual length is read from the HTTP
header using the strtol() function.

If Content-Length is not found, then the code searches for Transfer-Encoding: chunked.
If found, we set encoding = chunked. remaining is set to 0 to indicate that we haven't
read in a chunk length yet.

If neither Content-Length or Transfer-Encoding: chunked is found, then encoding =
connection is set to indicate that we consider the HTTP body received when the
connection is closed.

The code for determining which body length method is used is as follows:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

                  q = strstr(response, "\nContent-Length: ");
                  if (q) {
                      encoding = length;
                      q = strchr(q, ' ');
                      q += 1;
                      remaining = strtol(q, 0, 10);

                  } else {
                      q = strstr(response, "\nTransfer-Encoding: chunked");
                      if (q) {
                          encoding = chunked;
                          remaining = 0;
                      } else {
                          encoding = connection;
                      }
                  }
                  printf("\nReceived Body:\n");
              }


The preceding code could be made more robust by doing case-insensitive
searching, or by allowing for some flexibility in spacing. However, it should
work with most web servers as is, and we're going to continue to keep it simple.

If the HTTP body start has been identified, and encoding == length, then the
program simply needs to wait until remaining bytes have been received. The
following code checks for this:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

              if (body) {
                  if (encoding == length) {
                      if (p - body >= remaining) {
                          printf("%.*s", remaining, body);
                          break;
                      }


In the preceding code, once remaining bytes of the HTTP body have been
received, it prints the received body and breaks from the while loop.

If Transfer-Encoding: chunked is used, then the receiving logic is a bit more
complicated. The following code handles this:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

                  } else if (encoding == chunked) {
                      do {
                          if (remaining == 0) {
                              if ((q = strstr(body, "\r\n"))) {
                                  remaining = strtol(body, 0, 16);
                                  if (!remaining) goto finish;
                                  body = q + 2;
                              } else {
                                  break;
                              }
                          }
                          if (remaining && p - body >= remaining) {
                              printf("%.*s", remaining, body);
                              body += remaining + 2;
                              remaining = 0;
                          }
                      } while (!remaining);
                  }
              } //if (body)


In the preceding code, the remaining variable is used to indicate whether a chunk
length or chunk data is expected next. When remaining == 0, the program is
waiting to receive a new chunk length. Each chunk length ends with a newline;
therefore, if a newline is found with strstr(), we know that the entire chunk
length has been received. In this case, the chunk length is read using strtol(),
which interprets the hexadecimal chunk length. remaining is set to the expected
chunk length. A chunked message is terminated by a zero-length chunk, so if 0
was read, the code uses goto finish to break out of the main loop.

If the remaining variable is non-zero, then the program checks whether at
least remaining bytes of data have been received. If so, that chunk is printed, and
the body pointer is advanced to the end of the current chunk. This logic loops until
it finds the terminating zero-length chunk or runs out of data.

At this point, we've shown all of the logic to parse the HTTP response body. We
only need to end our loops, close the socket, and the program is finished. Here is
the final code for web_get.c:
  /*web_get.c continued*/

          } //if FDSET
      } //end while(1)
  finish:

      printf("\nClosing socket...\n");
      CLOSESOCKET(server);

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      printf("Finished.\n");
      return 0;
  }


You can compile and run web_get.c on Linux and macOS with the following
commands:
  gcc web_get.c -o web_get
  ./web_get http://example.com/


On Windows, the command to compile and run using MinGW is as follows:
  gcc web_get.c -o web_get.exe -lws2_32
  web_get.exe http://example.com/


Try running web_get with different URLs and study the outputs. You may find the
HTTP response headers interesting.
The following screenshot shows what happens when we run web_get on
http://example.com/:
web_getonly supports the GET queries. POST queries are also common and useful.
Let's now look at HTTP POST requests.
HTTP POST requests
An HTTP POST request sends data from the web client to the web server. Unlike
an HTTP GET request, a POST request includes a body containing data (although
this body could be zero-length).

The POST body format can vary, and it should be identified by a Content-Type
header. Many modern, web-based APIs expect a POST body to be JSON encoded.

Consider the following HTTP POST request:
  POST /orders HTTP/1.1
  Host: example.com
  User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64; rv:64.0)
  Content-Type: application/json
  Content-Length: 56
  Connection: close

  {"symbol":"VOO","qty":"10","side":"buy","type":"market"}


In the preceding example, you can see that the HTTP POST request is similar to an
HTTP GET request. Notable differences are as follows: the request starts with POST
instead of GET; a Content-Type header field is included; a Content-Length header field
is present; and an HTTP message body is included. In that example, the HTTP
message body is in JSON format, as specified by the Content-Type header.
Encoding form data
If you encounter a form on a website, such as a login form, that form likely uses
a POST request to transmit its data to the web server. A standard HTML form
encodes the data it sends in a format called URL encoding, also called percent
encoding. When URL encoded form data is submitted in an HTTP POST request,
it uses the Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded header.

Consider the following HTML for a submittable form:
  <form method="post" action="/submission.php">

    <label for="name">Name:</label>
    <input name="name" type="text"><br>

    <label for="comment">Comment:</label>
    <input name="comment" type="text"><br>

    <input type="submit" value="submit">

  </form>


In your web browser, the preceding HTML may render as shown in the
following screenshot:
When this form is submitted, its data is encoded in an HTTP request such as the
following:
  POST /submission.php HTTP/1.1
  Host: 127.0.0.1:8080
  User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_7)
  Accept-Language: en-US
  Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate
  Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
  Content-Length: 31
  Connection: keep-alive

  name=Alice&comment=Well+Done%21


In the preceding HTTP request, you can see that Content-Type: application/x-www-
form-urlencoded is used. In this format, each form field and value is paired by an

equal sign, and multiple form fields are chained together by ampersands.

Special characters in form field names or values must be encoded. Notice that
Well Done! was encoded as Well+Done%21. Spaces are encoded with plus symbols, and
special characters are encoded by a percent sign followed by their two-digit
hexadecimal value (thus, the exclamation point was encoded as %21). A percent
sign itself would be encoded as %25.
File uploads
When an HTML form includes file uploads, the browser uses a different content
type. In this case, Content-Type: multipart/form-data is used. When Content-Type:
multipart/form-data is used, a boundary specifier is included. This boundary is a

special delimiter, set by the sender, which separates parts of the submitted form
data.

Consider the following HTML form:
  <form method="post" enctype="multipart/form-data" action="/submit.php">
      <input name="name" type="text"><br>
      <input name="comment" type="text"><br>
      <input name="file" type="file"><br>
      <input type="submit" value="submit">
  </form>


If the user navigates to a web page bearing the HTML form from the preceding
code, and enters the name Alice, the comment Well Done!, and selects a file to
upload called upload.txt, then the following HTTP POST request could be sent by
the browser:
  POST /submit.php HTTP/1.1
  Host: example.com
  Content-Type: multipart/form-data; boundary=-----------233121195710604
  Content-Length: 1727

  -------------233121195710604
  Content-Disposition: form-data; name="name"

  Alice
  -------------233121195710604
  Content-Disposition: form-data; name="comment"

  Well Done!
  -------------233121195710604
  Content-Disposition: form-data; name="file"; filename="upload.txt"
  Content-Type: text/plain

  Hello.... <truncated>


As you can see, when using multipart/form-data, each section of data is separated
by a boundary. This boundary is what allows the receiver to delineate between
separate fields or uploaded files. It is important that this boundary is chosen so
that it does not appear in any submitted field or uploaded file!
Summary
HTTP is the protocol that powers the modern internet. It is behind every web
page, every link click, every graphic loaded, and every form submitted. In this
chapter, we saw that HTTP is a text-based protocol that runs over a TCP
connection. We learned the HTTP formats for both client requests and server
responses.

In this chapter, we also implemented a simple HTTP client in C. This client had
a few non-trivial tasks – parsing a URL, formatting a GET request HTTP header,
waiting for a response, and parsing the received data out of the HTTP response.
In particular, we looked at handling two different methods of parsing out the
HTTP body. The first, and easiest, method was Content-Length, where the entire
body length is explicitly specified. The second method was chunked encoding,
where the body is sent as separate chunks, which our program had to delineate
between.

We also briefly looked at the POST requests and the content formats associated
with them.

In the next chapter, Chapter 7, Building a Simple Web Server, we will develop the
counterpart to our HTTP client—an HTTP server.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge from this chapter:

 1. Does HTTP use TCP or UDP?
 2. What types of resources can be sent over HTTP?
 3. What are the common HTTP request types?
 4. What HTTP request type is typically used to send data from the server to
    the client?
 5. What HTTP request type is typically used to send data from the client to the
    server?
 6. What are the two common methods used to determine an HTTP response
    body length?
 7. How is the HTTP request body formatted for a POST-type HTTP request?

The answers to these questions can be found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Further reading
For more information about HTTP and HTML, please refer to the following
resources:

    RFC 7230: Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Message Syntax and
    Routing (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230)
    RFC 7231: Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Semantics and
    Content (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231)
    RFC 1866: Hypertext Markup Language – 2.0 (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc
    1866)
    RFC 3986: Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax (https://tool
    s.ietf.org/html/rfc3986)
Building a Simple Web Server
This chapter builds on the previous one by looking at the HTTP protocol from
the server's perspective. In it, we will build a simple web server. This web server
will work using the HTTP protocol, and you will be able to connect to it with
any standard web browser. Although it won't be full-featured, it will be suitable
for serving a few static files locally. It will be able to handle a few simultaneous
connections from multiple clients at once.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     Accepting and buffering multiple connections
     Parsing an HTTP request line
     Formatting an HTTP response
     Serving a file
     Security considerations
Technical requirements
The example programs from this chapter can be compiled with any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW on Windows and GCC on Linux and macOS;
see Appendices B, Setting Up Your C Compiler on Windows, Appendices C, Setting Up
Your C Compiler on Linux, and Appendices D, Setting Up Your C Compiler on
macOS, for compiler setup.

The code for this book can be found at https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-P
rogramming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap07


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
While compiling on Windows, each example program requires linking to the
Winsock library. This can be accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to gcc.

We provide the exact commands needed to compile each example as they are
introduced.

All of the example programs in this chapter require the same header files and C
macros that we developed in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. For
brevity, we put these statements in a separate header file, chap07.h, which we can
include in each program. For an explanation of these statements, please refer to C
hapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.


The content of chap07.h is as follows:
  /*chap07.h*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")
#else
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/socket.h>
#include <netinet/in.h>
#include <arpa/inet.h>
#include <netdb.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <errno.h>

#endif


#if defined(_WIN32)
#define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
#define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
#define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

#else
#define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
#define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
#define SOCKET int
#define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
#endif


#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
The HTTP server
In this chapter, we are going to implement an HTTP web server that can serve
static files from a local directory. HTTP is a text-based client-server protocol that
uses the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP).

When implementing our HTTP server, we need to support multiple,
simultaneous connections from many clients at once. Each received HTTP
Request needs to be parsed, and our server needs to reply with the proper HTTP
Response. This HTTP Response should include the requested file if possible.

Consider the HTTP transaction illustrated in the following diagram:




In the preceding diagram, the client is requesting /document.htm from the server.
The server finds /document.htm and returns it to the client.

Our HTTP server is somewhat simplified, and we only need to look at the first
line of the HTTP request. This first line is called the request line. Our server
only supports GET type requests, so it needs to first check that the request line
starts with GET. It then parses out the requested resource, /document.htm in the
preceding example.
A more full-featured HTTP server would look at several other HTTP headers. It
would look at the Host header to determine which site it is hosting. Our server
only supports hosting one site, so this header is not meaningful for us.

A production server would also look at headers such as Accept-Encoding and
Accept-Language, which could inform a proper response format. Our server just
ignores these, and it instead serves files in only the most straightforward way.

The internet can sometimes be a hostile environment. A production-grade web
server needs to include security in layers. It should be absolutely meticulous
about file access and resource allocation. In the interest of clear explanation and
brevity, the server we develop in this chapter is not security-hardened, and it
should not be used on the public internet for this reason.
The server architecture
An HTTP server is a complicated program. It must handle multiple simultaneous
connections, parse a complex text-based protocol, handle malformed requests
with the proper errors, and serve files. The example we develop in this chapter is
greatly simplified from a production-ready server, but it is still a few hundred
lines of code. We benefit from breaking the program down into separate
functions and data structures.

At the global level, our program stores a linked list of data structures. This
linked list contains one separate data structure for each connected client. This
data structure stores information about each client such as their address, their
socket, and their data received so far. We implement many helper functions that
work on this global linked list. These functions are used to add new clients, drop
clients, wait on client data, look up clients by their socket (as sockets are
returned by select()), serve files to clients, and send error messages to clients.

Our server's main loop can then be simplified. It waits for new connections or
new data. When new data is received, it checks whether the data consists of a
complete HTTP request. If a complete HTTP request is received, the server
attempts to send the requested resource. If the HTTP request is malformed or the
resource cannot be found, then the server sends an error message to the
connected client instead.

Most of the server complexity lies in handling multiple connections, parsing the
HTTP request, and handling error conditions.

The server is also responsible for telling the client the content type of each
resource it sends. There are a few ways to accomplish this; let's consider them
next.
Content types
It is the HTTP server's job to tell its client the type of content being sent. This is
done by the Content-Type header. The value of the Content-Type header should be a
valid media type (formerly known as the MIME type) registered with
the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA). See the Further reading
section of this chapter for a link to the IANA list of media types.

There are a few ways to determine the media type of a file. If you're on a Unix-
based system, such as Linux or macOS, then your operating system already
provides a utility for this.

Try the following command on Linux or macOS (replace example.txt with a real
filename):
  file --mime-type example.txt


The following screenshot shows its usage:




As you can see in the preceding screenshot, the file utility told us the media type
of index.html is text/html. It also said the media type of smile.png is image/png, and the
media type of test.txt is text/plain.

Our web server just uses the file's extension to determine the media type.

Common file extensions and their media type are listed in the following table:
         Extension                             Media Type
 .css                       text/css

 .csv                       text/csv

 .gif                       image/gif

 .htm                       text/html

 .html                      text/html

 .ico                       image/x-icon

 .jpeg                      image/jpeg

 .jpg                       image/jpeg

 .js                        application/javascript

 .json                      application/json

 .png                       image/png

 .pdf                       application/pdf

 .svg                       image/svg+xml

 .txt                       text/plain




If a file's media type is unknown, then our server should use application/octet-
stream as a default. This indicates that the browser should treat the content as an
unknown binary blob.

Let's continue by writing code to get Content-Type from a filename.
Returning Content-Type from a
filename
Our server code uses a series of if statements to determine the proper media type
based only on the requested file's extension. This isn't a perfect solution, but it is
a common one, and it works for our purposes.

The code to determine a file's media type is as follows:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  const char *get_content_type(const char* path) {
      const char *last_dot = strrchr(path, '.');
      if (last_dot) {
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".css") == 0) return "text/css";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".csv") == 0) return "text/csv";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".gif") == 0) return "image/gif";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".htm") == 0) return "text/html";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".html") == 0) return "text/html";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".ico") == 0) return "image/x-icon";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".jpeg") == 0) return "image/jpeg";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".jpg") == 0) return "image/jpeg";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".js") == 0) return "application/javascript";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".json") == 0) return "application/json";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".png") == 0) return "image/png";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".pdf") == 0) return "application/pdf";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".svg") == 0) return "image/svg+xml";
          if (strcmp(last_dot, ".txt") == 0) return "text/plain";
      }

      return "application/octet-stream";
  }


The get_content_type() function works by matching the filename extension to a list
of known extensions. This is done by using the strrchr() function to find the last
dot (.) in the filename. If a dot is found, then strcmp() is used to check for a match
on each extension. When a match is found, the proper media type is returned.
Otherwise, the default of application/octet-stream is returned instead.

Let's continue building helper functions for our server.
Creating the server socket
Before entertaining the exciting parts of the HTTP server, such as message
parsing, let's get the basics out of the way. Our HTTP server, like all servers,
needs to create a listening socket to accept new connections. We define a
function, create_socket(), for this purpose. This function begins by using
getaddrinfo() to find the listening address:

  /*web_server.c except*/

  SOCKET create_socket(const char* host, const char *port) {
      printf("Configuring local address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_family = AF_INET;
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;
      hints.ai_flags = AI_PASSIVE;

      struct addrinfo *bind_address;
      getaddrinfo(host, port, &hints, &bind_address);


create_socket()then continues with creating a socket using socket(), binding that
socket to the listening address with bind(), and having the socket enter a listening
state with listen(). The following code calls these functions while detecting error
conditions:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET socket_listen;
      socket_listen = socket(bind_address->ai_family,
              bind_address->ai_socktype, bind_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_listen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }

      printf("Binding socket to local address...\n");
      if (bind(socket_listen,
                  bind_address->ai_addr, bind_address->ai_addrlen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "bind() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }
      freeaddrinfo(bind_address);

      printf("Listening...\n");
      if (listen(socket_listen, 10) < 0) {
          fprintf(stderr, "listen() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }
      return socket_listen;
  }


The preceding code should be very familiar to you if you're working through this
book in order. If not, please refer to Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP
Connections, for information about setting up TCP servers.
Multiple connections buffering
One important hurdle to overcome, when implementing any server software, is
accepting and parsing requests from multiple clients simultaneously.

Consider a client that sends only the beginning of an HTTP request, followed by
a delay, and then the remainder of the HTTP request. In this case, we cannot
respond to that client until the entire HTTP request is received. However, at the
same time, we do not wish to delay servicing other connected clients while
waiting. For this reason, we need to buffer up received data for each client
separately. Only once we've received an entire HTTP request from a client can
we respond to that client.

It is useful to define a C struct to store information on each connected client. Our
program uses the following:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  #define MAX_REQUEST_SIZE 2047

  struct client_info {
      socklen_t address_length;
      struct sockaddr_storage address;
      SOCKET socket;
      char request[MAX_REQUEST_SIZE + 1];
      int received;
      struct client_info *next;
  };


This struct allows us to store information about each connected client. A client's
address is stored in the address field, the address length in address_length, and the
socket in the socket field. All of the data received from the client so far is stored
in the request array; received indicates the number of bytes stored in that array.
The next field is a pointer that allows us to store client_info structures in a linked
list.

To simplify our code, we store the root of our linked list in a global variable,
clients. The declaration is as follows:

  /*web_server.c except*/

  static struct client_info *clients = 0;
Declaring clients as a global variable helps to keep our code slightly shorter and
clearer. However, if you require the code to be re-entrant (for example, if you
want multiple servers running simultaneously), you will want to avoid the global
state. This can be done by passing around the linked list root as a separate
argument to each function call. This chapter's code repository includes an
example of this alternative technique in the web_server2.c file.

It is useful to define a number of helper functions that work on the client_info
data structure and the clients linked list. We implement the following helper
functions for these purposes:

     get_client() takes a SOCKET variable and searches our linked list for the
     corresponding client_info data structure.
     drop_client() closes the connection to a client and removes it from the clients
     linked list.
     get_client_address() returns a client's IP address as a string (character array).
     wait_on_clients() uses the select() function to wait until either a client has
     data available or a new client is attempting to connect.
     send_400() and send_404() are used to handle HTTP error conditions.
     serve_resource() attempts to transfer a file to a connected client.


Let's now implement these functions one at a time.
get_client()
Our get_client() function accepts a SOCKET and searches through the linked list of
connected clients to return the relevant client_info for that SOCKET. If no matching
client_info is found in the linked list, then a new client_info is allocated and added

to the linked list. Therefore, get_client() serves two purposes—it can find an
existing client_info, or it can create a new client_info.

           takes a SOCKET as its input and return a client_info structure. The
get_client()
following code is the first part of the get_client() function:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  struct client_info *get_client(SOCKET s) {
      struct client_info *ci = clients;

      while(ci) {
          if (ci->socket == s)
              break;
          ci = ci->next;
      }

      if (ci) return ci;


In the preceding code, we created the get_client() function and implemented our
linked list search functionality. First, the linked list root, clients, is saved into a
temporary variable, ci. If ci->socket is the socket we are searching for, then the
loop breaks and ci is returned. If the client_info structure for the given socket isn't
found, then the code continues on and must create a new client_info structure.
The following code achieves this:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      struct client_info *n =
          (struct client_info*) calloc(1, sizeof(struct client_info));

      if (!n) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Out of memory.\n");
          exit(1);
      }

      n->address_length = sizeof(n->address);
      n->next = clients;
      clients = n;
      return n;
  }
In the preceding code, the calloc() function is used to allocate memory for a new
client_info structure. The calloc() function also zeroes-out the data structure,

which is useful in this case. The code then checks that the memory allocation
succeeded, and it prints an error message if it fails.

The code then sets n->address_length to the proper size. This allows us to use
accept() directly on the client_info address later, as accept() requires the maximum

address length as an input.

The n->next field is set to the current global linked list root, and the global linked
list root, clients, is set to n. This accomplishes the task of adding in the new data
structure at the beginning of the linked list.

The get_client() function ends by returning the newly allocated client_info
structure, n.
drop_client()
The drop_client() function searches through our linked list of clients and removes
a given client.

The entire function is given in the following code:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  void drop_client(struct client_info *client) {
      CLOSESOCKET(client->socket);

      struct client_info **p = &clients;

      while(*p) {
          if (*p == client) {
              *p = client->next;
              free(client);
              return;
          }
          p = &(*p)->next;
      }

      fprintf(stderr, "drop_client not found.\n");
      exit(1);
  }


As you can see in the preceding code, CLOSESOCKET() is first used to close and clean
up the client's connection.

The function then declares a pointer-to-pointer variable, p, and sets it to clients.
This pointer-to-pointer variable is useful because we can use it to change the
value of clients directly. Indeed, if the client to be removed is the first element in
the linked list, then clients needs to be updated, so that clients points to the
second element in the list.

The code uses a while loop to walk through the linked list. Once it finds that *p ==
client, *p, is set to client->next, which effectively removes the client from the
linked list, the allocated memory is then freed and the function returns.

Although drop_client() is a simple function, it is handy as it can be called in
several circumstances. It must be called when we finish sending a client a
resource, and it also must be called when we finish sending a client an error
message.
get_client_address()
It is useful to have a helper function that converts a given client's IP address into
text. This function is given in the following code snippet:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  const char *get_client_address(struct client_info *ci) {
      static char address_buffer[100];
      getnameinfo((struct sockaddr*)&ci->address,
              ci->address_length,
              address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer), 0, 0,
              NI_NUMERICHOST);
      return address_buffer;
  }


get_client_address() is a simple function. It first allocates a char array to store the IP
address in. This char array is declared static, which ensures that its memory is
available after the function returns. This means that we don't need to worry about
having the caller free() the memory. The downside to this method is that
get_client_address() has a global state and is not re-entrant-safe. See web_server2.c
for an alternative version that is re-entrant-safe.

After a char buffer is available, the code simply uses getnameinfo() to convert the
binary IP address into a text address; getnameinfo() was covered in detail in
previous chapters, but Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and DNS, has a
particularly detailed explanation.
wait_on_clients()
Our server is capable of handling many simultaneous connections. This means
that our server must have a way to wait for data from multiple clients at once.
We define a function, wait_on_clients(), which blocks until an existing client sends
data, or a new client attempts to connect. This function uses select() as described
in previous chapters. Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections, has a
detailed explanation of select().

The wait_on_clients() function is defined as follows:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  fd_set wait_on_clients(SOCKET server) {
      fd_set reads;
      FD_ZERO(&reads);
      FD_SET(server, &reads);
      SOCKET max_socket = server;

      struct client_info *ci = clients;

      while(ci) {
          FD_SET(ci->socket, &reads);
          if (ci->socket > max_socket)
              max_socket = ci->socket;
          ci = ci->next;
      }

      if (select(max_socket+1, &reads, 0, 0, 0) < 0) {
          fprintf(stderr, "select() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }

      return reads;
  }


In the preceding code, first a new fd_set is declared and zeroed-out. The server
socket is then added to the fd_set first. Then the code loops through the linked list
of connected clients and adds the socket for each one in turn. A variable,
max_socket, is maintained throughout this process to store the maximum socket
number as required by select().

After all the sockets are added to fd_set reads, the code calls select(),
and select() returns when one or more of the sockets in reads is ready.

The wait_on_clients() function returns reads so that the caller can see which socket
is ready.
send_400()
In the case where a client sends an HTTP request which our server does not
understand, it is helpful to send a code 400 error. Because errors of this type can
arise in several situations, we wrap this functionality in the send_400() function.
The entire function follows:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  void send_400(struct client_info *client) {
      const char *c400 = "HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request\r\n"
          "Connection: close\r\n"
          "Content-Length: 11\r\n\r\nBad Request";
      send(client->socket, c400, strlen(c400), 0);
      drop_client(client);
  }


The send_400() function first declares a text array with the entire HTTP response
hard-coded. This text is sent using the send() function, and then the client is
dropped by calling the drop_client() function we defined earlier.
send_404()
In addition to the 400 Bad Request error, our server also needs to handle the case
where a requested resource is not found. In this case, a 404 Not Found error should
be returned. We define a helper function to return this error as follows:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  void send_404(struct client_info *client) {
      const char *c404 = "HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found\r\n"
          "Connection: close\r\n"
          "Content-Length: 9\r\n\r\nNot Found";
      send(client->socket, c404, strlen(c404), 0);
      drop_client(client);
  }


The send_404() function works exactly like the send_400() function defined
previously.
serve_resource()
The serve_resource() function sends a connected client a requested resource. Our
server expects all hosted files to be in a subdirectory called public. Ideally, our
server should not allow access to any files outside of this public directory.
However, as we shall see, enforcing this restriction may be more difficult than it
first appears.

Our serve_resource() function takes as arguments a connected client and a
requested resource path. The function begins as follows:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  void serve_resource(struct client_info *client, const char *path) {

      printf("serve_resource %s %s\n", get_client_address(client), path);


The connected client's IP address and the requested path are printed to aid in
debugging. In a production server, you would also want to print additional
information. Most production servers log the date, time, request method, the
client's user-agent string, and the response code as a minimum.

Our function then normalizes the requested path. There are a few things to check
for. First, if the path is /, then we need to serve a default file. There is a tradition
of serving a file called index in that case, and, indeed, this is what our code does.

We also check that the path isn't too long. Once we ensure that the path is below
a maximum length, we can use fixed-size arrays to store it without worrying
about buffer overflows.

Our code also checks that the path doesn't contain two consecutive dots—... In
file paths, two dots indicate a reference to a parent directory. However, for
security reasons, we want to allow access only into our public directory. We do
not want to provide access to any parent directory. If we allowed paths with ..,
then a malicious client could send GET /../web_server.c HTTP/1.1 and gain access to
our server source code!

The following code is used to redirect root requests and to prevent long or
obviously malicious requests:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      if (strcmp(path, "/") == 0) path = "/index.html";

      if (strlen(path) > 100) {
          send_400(client);
          return;
      }

      if (strstr(path, "..")) {
          send_404(client);
          return;
      }


Our code now needs to convert the path to refer to files in the public directory.
This is done with the sprintf() function. First, a text-array is reserved, full_path,
and then sprintf() is used to store the full path into it. We are able to reserve a
fixed allocation for full_path, as our earlier code ensured that path does not exceed
100 characters in length.


The code to set full_path is as follows:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      char full_path[128];
      sprintf(full_path, "public%s", path);


It is important to note that the directory separator differs between Windows and
other operating systems. While Unix-based systems use a slash (/), Windows
instead uses a backslash (\) as its standard. Many Windows functions handle the
conversion automatically, but the difference is sometimes important. For our
simple server, the slash conversion isn't an absolute requirement. However, we
include it anyway as a good practice.

The following code converts slashes to backslashes on Windows:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      char *p = full_path;
      while (*p) {
          if (*p == '/') *p = '\\';
          ++p;
      }
  #endif


The preceding code works by stepping through the full_path text array and
detecting slash characters. When a slash is found, it is simply overwritten with a
backslash. Note that the C code '\\' is equivalent to only one backslash. This is
because the backslash has special meaning in C, and therefore the first backslash
is used to escape the second backslash.

At this point, our server can check whether the requested resource actually
exists. This is done by using the fopen() function. If fopen() fails, for any reason,
then our server assumes that the file does not exist. The following code sends a
404 error if the requested resource isn't available:


  /*web_server.c except*/

      FILE *fp = fopen(full_path, "rb");

      if (!fp) {
          send_404(client);
          return;
      }


If fopen() succeeds, then we can use fseek() and ftell() to determine the requested
file's size. This is important, as we need to use the file's size in the Content-Length
header. The following code finds the file size and stores it in the cl variable:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      fseek(fp, 0L, SEEK_END);
      size_t cl = ftell(fp);
      rewind(fp);


Once the file size is known, we also want to get the file's type. This is used in the
Content-Type header. We already defined a function, get_content_type(), which makes

this task easy. The content type is store in the variable ct by the following code:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      const char *ct = get_content_type(full_path);


Once the file has been located and we have its length and type, the server can
begin sending the HTTP response. We first reserve a temporary buffer to store
header fields in:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  #define BSIZE 1024
      char buffer[BSIZE];


Once the buffer is reserved, the server prints relevant headers into it and then
sends those headers to the client. This is done using sprintf() and then send() in
turn. The following code sends the HTTP response header:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      sprintf(buffer, "HTTP/1.1 200 OK\r\n");
      send(client->socket, buffer, strlen(buffer), 0);

      sprintf(buffer, "Connection: close\r\n");
      send(client->socket, buffer, strlen(buffer), 0);

      sprintf(buffer, "Content-Length: %u\r\n", cl);
      send(client->socket, buffer, strlen(buffer), 0);

      sprintf(buffer, "Content-Type: %s\r\n", ct);
      send(client->socket, buffer, strlen(buffer), 0);

      sprintf(buffer, "\r\n");
      send(client->socket, buffer, strlen(buffer), 0);


Note that the last send() statement sends \r\n. This has the effect of transmitting a
blank line. This blank line is used by the client to delineate the HTTP header
from the beginning of the HTTP body.

The server can now send the actual file content. This is done by calling fread()
repeatedly until the entire file is sent:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      int r = fread(buffer, 1, BSIZE, fp);
      while (r) {
          send(client->socket, buffer, r, 0);
          r = fread(buffer, 1, BSIZE, fp);
      }


In the preceding code, fread() is used to read enough data to fill buffer. This
buffer is then transmitted to the client using send(). These steps are looped until
fread() returns 0; this indicates that the entire file has been read.


Note that send() may block on large files. In a truly robust, production-ready
server, you would need to handle this case. It could be done by using select() to
determine when each socket is ready to read. Another common method is to use
fork() or similar APIs to create separate threads/processes for each connected

client. For simplicity, our server accepts the limitation that send() blocks on large
files. Please refer to Chapter 13, Socket Programming Tips and Pitfalls, for more
information about the blocking behavior of send().

The function can finish by closing the file handle and using drop_client() to
disconnect the client:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      fclose(fp);
      drop_client(client);
  }


That concludes the serve_resource() function.

Keep in mind that while serve_resource() attempts to limit access to only the public
directory, it is not adequate in doing so, and serve_resource() should not be used in
production code without carefully considering additional access loopholes. We
discuss more security concerns later in this chapter.

With these helper functions out of the way, implementing our main server loop is
a much easier task. We begin that next.
The main loop
With our many helper functions out of the way, we can now finish web_server.c.
Remember to first #include chap07.h and also add in all of the types and functions
we've defined so far—struct client_info, get_content_type(), create_socket(),
get_client(), drop_client(), get_client_address(), wait_on_clients(), send_400(), send_404(),

and serve_resource().

We can then begin the main() function. It starts by initializing Winsock on
Windows:
  /*web_server.c except*/

  int main() {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


We then use our earlier function, create_socket(), to create the listening socket.
Our server listens on port 8080, but feel free to change it. On Unix-based systems,
listening on low port numbers is reserved for privileged accounts. For security
reasons, our web server should be running with unprivileged accounts only. This
is why we use 8080 as our port number instead of the HTTP standard port, 80.

The code to create the server socket is as follows:
  /*web_server.c except*/

       SOCKET server = create_socket(0, "8080");


If you want to accept connections from only the local system, and not outside
systems, use the following code instead:
  /*web_server.c except*/

       SOCKET server = create_socket("127.0.0.1", "8080");


We then begin an endless loop that waits on clients. We call wait_on_clients() to
wait until a new client connects or an old client sends new data:
  /*web_server.c except*/

      while(1) {

          fd_set reads;
          reads = wait_on_clients(server);


The server then detects whether a new client has connected. This case is indicated
by server being set in fd_set reads. We use the FD_ISSET() macro to detect this
condition:
  /*web_server.c except*/

          if (FD_ISSET(server, &reads)) {
              struct client_info *client = get_client(-1);

              client->socket = accept(server,
                      (struct sockaddr*) &(client->address),
                      &(client->address_length));

              if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(client->socket)) {
                  fprintf(stderr, "accept() failed. (%d)\n",
                          GETSOCKETERRNO());
                  return 1;
              }


              printf("New connection from %s.\n",
                      get_client_address(client));
          }


Once a new client connection has been detected, get_client() is called with the
argument -1; -1 is not a valid socket specifier, so get_client() creates a new struct
client_info. This struct client_info is assigned to the client variable.


The accept() socket function is used to accept the new connection and place the
connected clients address information into the respective client fields. The new
socket returned by accept() is stored in client->socket.

The client's address is printed using a call to get_client_address(). This is helpful
for debugging.

Our server must then handle the case where an already connected client is
sending data. This is a bit more complicated. We first walk through the linked
list of clients and use FD_ISSET() on each client to determine which clients have
data available. Recall that the linked list root is stored in the clients global
variable.
We begin our linked list walk with the following:
  /*web_server.c except*/

          struct client_info *client = clients;
          while(client) {
              struct client_info *next = client->next;

              if (FD_ISSET(client->socket, &reads)) {


We then check that we have memory available to store more received data
for client. If the client's buffer is already completely full, then we send a 400 error.
The following code checks for this condition:
  /*web_server.c except*/

                  if (MAX_REQUEST_SIZE == client->received) {
                      send_400(client);
                      continue;
                  }


Knowing that we have at least some memory left to store received data, we can
use recv() to store the client's data. The following code uses recv() to write new
data into the client's buffer while being careful to not overflow that buffer:
  /*web_server.c except*/

                  int r = recv(client->socket,
                          client->request + client->received,
                          MAX_REQUEST_SIZE - client->received, 0);


A client that disconnects unexpectedly causes recv() to return a non-positive
number. In this case, we need to use drop_client() to clean up our memory
allocated for that client:
  /*web_server.c except*/

                  if (r < 1) {
                      printf("Unexpected disconnect from %s.\n",
                              get_client_address(client));
                      drop_client(client);


If the received data was written successfully, our server adds a null terminating
character to the end of that client's data buffer. This allows us to use strstr() to
search the buffer, as the null terminator tells strstr() when to stop.

Recall that the HTTP header and body is delineated by a blank line. Therefore, if
strstr() finds a blank line (\r\n\r\n), we know that the HTTP header has been
received and we can begin to parse it. The following code detects whether the
HTTP header has been received:
  /*web_server.c except*/

                  } else {
                      client->received += r;
                      client->request[client->received] = 0;

                      char *q = strstr(client->request, "\r\n\r\n");
                      if (q) {


Our server only handles GET requests. We also enforce that any valid path should
start with a slash character; strncmp() is used to detect these two conditions in the
following code:
  /*web_server.c except*/

                          if (strncmp("GET /", client->request, 5)) {
                              send_400(client);
                          } else {
                              char *path = client->request + 4;
                              char *end_path = strstr(path, " ");
                              if (!end_path) {
                                  send_400(client);
                              } else {
                                  *end_path = 0;
                                  serve_resource(client, path);
                              }
                          }
                      } //if (q)


In the preceding code, a proper GET request causes the execution of the else
branch. Here, we set the path variable to the beginning of the request path, which
is starting at the fifth character of the HTTP request (because C arrays start at
zero, the fifth character is located at client->request + 4).

The end of the requested path is indicated by finding the next space character. If
found, we just call our serve_resource() function to fulfil the client's request.

Our server is basically functional at this point. We only need to finish our loops
and close out the main() function. The following code accomplishes this:
  /*web_server.c except*/

                  }
              }

              client = next;
          }

      } //while(1)
      printf("\nClosing socket...\n");
      CLOSESOCKET(server);


  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      printf("Finished.\n");
      return 0;
  }


Note that our server doesn't actually have a way to break from its infinite loop. It
simply listens to connections forever. As an exercise, you may want to add in
functionality that allows the server to shut down cleanly. This was omitted only
to keep the code simpler. It may also be useful to drop all connected clients with
this line of code—while(clients) drop_client(clients);

That concludes the code for web_server.c. I recommend you download web_server.c
from this book's code repository and try it out.

You can compile and run web_server.c on Linux and macOS with the following
commands:
  gcc web_server.c -o web_server
  ./web_server


On Windows, the command to compile and run using MinGW is as follows:
  gcc web_server.c -o web_server.exe -lws2_32
  web_server.exe


The following screenshot shows the server being compiled and run on macOS:
If you connect to the server using a standard web browser, you should see
something such as the following screenshot:
You can also drop different files into the public folder and play around with
creating more complicated websites.

An alternative source file, web_server2.c, is also provided in this chapter's code
repository. It behaves exactly like the code we developed, but it avoids having
global state (at the expense of a little added verbosity). This may make
web_server2.c more suitable for integration into more significant projects and
continued development.

Although the web server we developed certainly works, it does have a number of
shortcomings. Please don't deploy this server (or any other network code) in the
wild without very carefully considering these shortcomings, some of which we
address next.
Security and robustness
One of the most important rules, when developing networked code, is that your
program should never trust the connected peer. Your code should never assume
that the connected peer sends data in a particular format. This is especially vital
for server code that may communicate with multiple clients at once.

If your code doesn't carefully check for errors and unexpected conditions, then it
will be vulnerable to exploits.

Consider the following code which receives data into a buffer until a space
character is found:
  char buffer[1028] = {0};
  char *p = buffer;

  while (!strstr(p, " "))
      p += recv(client, p, 1028, 0);


The preceding code works simply. It reserves 1,028 bytes of buffer space and
then uses recv() to write received data into that space. The p pointer is updated on
each read to indicate where the next data should be written. The code then loops
until the strstr() function detects a space character.

That code could be useful to read data from a client until an HTTP verb is
detected. For example, it could receive data until GET is received, at which point
the server can begin to process a GET request.

One problem with the preceding code is that recv() could write past the end of the
allocated space for buffer. This is because 1028 is passed to recv(), even if some
data has already been written. If a network client can cause your code to write
past the end of a buffer, then that client may be able to completely compromise
your server. This is because both data and executable code are stored in your
server's memory. A malicious client may be able to write executable code past
the buffer array and cause your program to execute it. Even if the malicious code
isn't executed, the client could still overwrite other important data in your
server's memory.
The preceding code can be fixed by passing to recv() only the amount of buffer
space remaining:
  char buffer[1028] = {0};
  char *p = buffer;

  while (!strstr(p, " "))
      p += recv(client, p, 1028 - (p - buffer), 0);


In this case, recv() is not be able to write more than 1,028 bytes total into buffer.
You may think that the memory errors are resolved, but you would still be
wrong. Consider a client that sends 1,028 bytes, but no space characters. Your
code then calls strstr() looking for a space character. Considering that buffer is
completely full now, strstr() cannot find a space character or a null terminating
character! In that case, strstr() continues to read past the end of buffer into
unallocated memory.

So, you fix this issue by only allowing recv() to write 1,027 bytes total. This
reserves one byte to remain as the null terminating character:
  char buffer[1028] = {0};
  char *p = buffer;

  while (!strstr(p, " "))
      p += recv(client, p, 1027 - (p - buffer), 0);


Now your code won't write or read past the array bounds for buffer, but the code
is still very broken. Consider a client that sends 1,027 characters. Or consider a
client that sends a single null character. In either case, the preceding code
continues to loop forever, thus locking up your server and preventing other
clients from being served.

Hopefully, the previous examples illustrate the care needed to implement a
server in C. Indeed, it's easy to create bugs in any programming language, but in
C special care needs to be taken to avoid memory errors.

Another issue with server software is that the server wants to allow access to
some files on the system, but not others. A malicious client could send an HTTP
request that tries to download arbitrary files from your server system. For
example, if an HTTP request such as GET /../secret_file.c HTTP/1.1 was sent to a
naive HTTP server, that server may send the secret_file.c to the connected client,
even though it exists outside of the public directory!
Our code in web_server.c detects the most obvious attempts at this by searching for
requests containing .. and denying those requests.

A robust server should use operating systems features to detect that requested
files exist as actual files in the permitted directory. Unfortunately, there is no
cross-platform way to do this, and the platform-dependent options are somewhat
complicated.

Please understand that these are not purely theoretical concerns, but actual
exploitable bugs. For example, if you run our web_server.c program on Windows
and a client sends the request GET /this_will_be_funny/PRN HTTP/1.1, what do you
suppose happens?

The this_will_be_funny directory doesn't exist, and the PRN file certainly doesn't
exist in that non-existent directory. These facts may lead you to think that the
server simply returns a 404 Not Found error, as expected. However, that's not what
happens. Under Windows, PRN is a special filename. When your server calls
fopen() on this special name, Windows doesn't look for a file, but rather it

connects to a printer interface! Other special names include COM1 (connects to
serial port 1) and LPT1 (connects to parallel port 1), although there are others.
Even if these filenames have an extension, such as PRN.txt, Windows still
redirects instead of looking for a file.

One generally applicable piece of security advice is this—run your networked
programs under non-privileged accounts that have access to only the minimum
resources needed to function. In other words, if you are going to run a networked
server, create a new account to run it under. Give that account read access to
only the files that server needs to serve. This is not a substitute for writing secure
code, but rather running as a non-privilege user creates one final barrier. It is
advice you should apply even when running hardened, industry-tested server
software.

Hopefully, the previous examples illustrate that programming is complicated,
and safe network programming in C can be difficult. It is best approached with
care. Oftentimes, it is not possible to know that you have all the loopholes
covered. Operating systems don't always have adequate documentation.
Operating system APIs often behave in non-obvious and non-intuitive ways. Be
careful.
Open source servers
The code developed in this chapter is suitable for use in trusted applications on
trusted networks. For example, if you are developing a video game, it can be
very useful to make it serve a web page that displays debugging information.
This doesn't have to be a security concern, as it can limit connections to the local
machine.

If you must deploy a web server on the internet, I suggest you consider using a
free and open source implementation that's already available. The web servers
Nginx and Apache, for example, are highly performant, cross-platform, secure,
written in C, and completely free. They are also well-documented and easy to
find support for.

If you want to expose your program to the internet, you can communicate to a
web server using either CGI or FastCGI. With CGI, the web server handles the
HTTP request. When a request comes in, it runs your program and returns your
program's output in the HTTP response body.

Alternatively, many web servers (such as Nginx or Apache) work as a reverse
proxy. This essentially puts the web server between your code and the internet.
The web server accepts and forwards HTTP messages to your HTTP server. This
can have the effect of slightly shielding your code from attackers.
Summary
In this chapter, we worked through implementing an HTTP server in C from
scratch. That's no small feat! Although the text-based nature of HTTP makes
parsing HTTP requests simple, we needed to spend a lot of effort to ensure that
multiple clients could be served simultaneously. We accomplished this by
buffering received data for each client separately. Each client's state information
was organized into a linked list.

Another difficulty was ensuring the safe handling of received data and detecting
errors. We learned that a programmer must be very careful when handling
network data to avoid creating security risks. We also saw that even very subtle
issues, such as Windows's special filenames, can potentially create dangerous
security holes for networked server applications.

In the next chapter, Chapter 8, Making Your Program Send Email, we move on
from HTTP and consider the primary protocol associated with email—Simple
Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP).
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge from this chapter:

 1. How does an HTTP client indicate that it has finished sending the HTTP
    request?
 2. How does an HTTP client know what type of content the HTTP server is
    sending?
 3. How can an HTTP server identify a file's media type?
 4. How can you tell whether a file exists on the filesystem and is readable by
    your program? Is fopen(filename, "r") != 0 a good test?

The answers to these questions can be found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Further reading
For more information about HTTP and HTML, please refer to the following:

    RFC 7230: Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Message Syntax and
    Routing (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230)
    RFC 7231: Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Semantics and
    Content (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231)
    Media Types (https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml)
Making Your Program Send Email
In this chapter, we will consider the protocol responsible for delivering email on
the internet. This protocol is called the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
(SMTP).

Following an exposition of the inner workings of email transfer, we will build a
simple SMTP client capable of sending short emails.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     How SMTP servers work
     Determining which mail server is responsible for a given domain
     Using SMTP
     Email encoding
     Spam-blocking and email-sending pitfalls
     SPF, DKIM, and DMARC
Technical requirements
The example programs from this chapter can be compiled with any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW on Windows and GCC on Linux and macOS.
See Appendix B, Setting Up Your C Compiler on Windows, Appendix C, Setting Up
Your C Compiler on Linux, and Appendix D, Setting Up Your C Compiler on
macOS, for compiler setup.

The code for this book can be found at https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-P
rogramming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap08


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
When compiling on Windows, each example program requires linking with the
Winsock library. This can be accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to gcc.

We provide the exact commands needed to compile each example as they are
introduced.

All of the example programs in this chapter require the same header files and C
macros that we developed in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. For
brevity, we put these statements in a separate header file, chap08.h, which we can
include in each program. For a detailed explanation of these statements, please
refer to Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.

The first part of chap08.h includes the needed networking headers for each
platform. The code for this is as follows:
  /*chap08.h*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

  #else
  #include <sys/types.h>
  #include <sys/socket.h>
  #include <netinet/in.h>
  #include <arpa/inet.h>
  #include <netdb.h>
  #include <unistd.h>
  #include <errno.h>

  #endif


We also define some macros to make writing portable code easier, and we'll
include the additional headers that our programs require:
  /*chap08.h continued*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

  #else
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
  #define SOCKET int
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
  #endif


  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <string.h>


That concludes chap08.h.
Email servers
SMTP is the protocol responsible for delivering emails between servers. It is a
text-based protocol operating on TCP port 25.

Not all emails need to be delivered between systems. For example, imagine you
have a Gmail account. If you compose and send an email to your friend who also
has a Gmail account, then SMTP is not necessarily used. In this case, Gmail only
needs to copy your email into their inbox (or do equivalent database updates).

On the other hand, consider a case where you send an email to your friend's
Yahoo! account. If the email is sent from your Gmail account, then it's clear that
the Gmail and Yahoo! servers must communicate. In that case, your email is
transmitted from the Gmail server to the Yahoo! server using SMTP.

This connection is illustrated in the following diagram:




Retrieving your email from your mail service provider is a different issue than
delivering email between service providers. Webmail is very popular now for
sending and receiving mail from your mail provider. Webmail providers allow
mailbox access through a web browser. Web browsers communicate using HTTP
(or HTTPS).

Let's consider the full path of an email from Alice to Bob. In this example, Alice
has Gmail as her mail provider, and Bob has Yahoo! as his mail provider. Both
Alice and Bob access their mailbox using a standard web browser. The path an
email takes from Bob to Alice is illustrated by the following diagram:
As you can see in the preceding diagram, SMTP is only used when delivering
the mail between mail providers. This usage of SMTP is called mail
transmission.

In fact, the email in this example could take other paths. Let's consider that Alice
uses a desktop email client instead of webmail. Gmail still supports desktop
email clients, and these clients offer many good features, even if they are falling
out of fashion. A typical desktop client connects to a mail provider using either:
Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) or Post Office Protocol (POP) and
SMTP. In this case, SMTP is used by Alice to deliver her mail to her mail
provider (Gmail). This usage of SMTP is called mail submission.

The Gmail provider then uses SMTP again to deliver the email to the Yahoo!
mail server. This is illustrated in the following diagram:
In the preceding diagram, the Gmail server would be considered an SMTP
relay. In general, an SMTP server should only relay mail for trusted users. If an
SMTP server relayed all mail, it would become quickly overwhelmed by
spammers.

Many mail providers have a set of mail servers used to accept incoming mail and
a separate set of mail servers used to accept outgoing mail from their users.

It is important to understand that SMTP is used to send mail. SMTP is not used
to retrieve mail from a server. IMAP and POP are the common protocols used by
desktop mail programs to retrieve mail from a server.

It is not necessary for Alice to send her mail through her provider's SMTP server.
Instead, she could send it directly to Bob's mail provider as illustrated in the
following diagram:




In practice, one usually delegates the delivery responsibility to their mail
provider. This has several advantages; namely, the mail provider can attempt a
redelivery if the destination mail server isn't available. Other advantages are
discussed later in this chapter.

The program we develop in this chapter is used to deliver mail directly to the
recipient's email provider. It is not useful to deliver mail to a relay server
because we are not going to implement authentication techniques. Generally,
SMTP servers do not relay mail without authenticating that the sender has an
account with them.
The SMTP protocol we describe in this chapter is unsecured and not encrypted.
This is convenient for explanation and learning purposes, but in the real world,
you may want to secure your email transfer.
SMTP security
We describe unsecured SMTP in this chapter. In real-world use, SMTP should be
secured if both communicating servers support it. Not all do.

Securing SMTP is done by having SMTP connections start out as plaintext
on port 25. The SMTP client then issues a STARTTLS command to upgrade to a
secure, encrypted connection. This secure connection works by merely running
the SMTP commands through a TLS layer; therefore, everything we cover in this
chapter is applicable to secure SMTP too. See Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web
Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL, for more information about TLS.

Mail transmission between servers is always done on port 25.

Many desktop email clients use TCP ports 465 or 587 for SMTP mail submission.
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) prefer these alternative ports for mail
submission, and it allows them to block port 25 altogether. This is generally
justified as a spam prevention technique.

Next, let's see how to determine which mail server receives mail for a given
email address.
Finding an email server
Consider the email address bob@example.com. In this case, bob identifies the user,
while example.com identifies the domain name of the service provider. These parts
are delineated by the @ symbol.

One domain name can potentially use multiple mail servers. Likewise, one mail
server can provide service for many domain names. For this reason, identifying
the mail server or servers responsible for receiving mail for bob@example.com isn't as
easy as connecting to example.com. Instead, the mail server must be identified by
performing a DNS lookup for an MX record.

DNS was covered in depth back in Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and DNS. The
program we developed in that chapter can be used to query MX records.

Otherwise, most operating systems provide a command-line tool for DNS
lookup. Windows provides nslookup, while Linux and macOS provide dig.

On Windows, we can find the mail servers responsible for accepting mail
@gmail.com using the following command:


  nslookup -type=mx gmail.com


This lookup is shown in the following screenshot:
On Linux or macOS, an MX record lookup for a @gmail.com account is done with
the following command:
  dig mx gmail.com


The use of dig is shown in the following screenshot:
As you can see in the preceding two screenshots, Gmail uses five mail servers.
When multiple MX records are found, mail should be delivered to the server
having the lowest MX preference first. If mail delivery fails to that server, then
an attempt should be made to deliver to the server having the next lowest
preference, and so on. At the time of this writing, Gmail's primary mail server,
having a preference of 5, is gmail-smtp-in.l.google.com. That is the SMTP server you
would connect to in order to send mail to an @gmail.com address.

It is also possible for MX records to have the same preference. Yahoo! uses mail
servers having the same preference. The following screenshot shows the MX
records for yahoo.com:
In the preceding screenshot, we see that Yahoo! uses three mail servers. Each
server has a preference of 1. This means that mail can be delivered to any one of
them with no special preference. If mail delivery fails to the first chosen server,
then another server should be chosen at random to retry.

Programmatically getting the MX record in a cross-platform manner can be
difficult. Please see Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and DNS, where this topic
was covered in some depth. The SMTP client we develop in this present chapter
assumes that the mail server is known in advance.

Now that we know which server to connect to, let's consider the SMTP protocol
itself in more detail.
SMTP dialog
SMTP is a text-based TCP protocol that works on port 25. SMTP works in a lock-
step, one-at-a-time dialog, with the client sending commands and the server
sending responses for each command.

In a typical session, the dialog goes as follows:

 1. The client first establishes a connection to the SMTP server.
 2. The server initiates with a greeting. This greeting indicates that the server is
    ready to receive commands.
 3. The client then issues its own greeting.
 4. The server responds.
 5. The client sends a command indicating who the mail is from.
 6. The server responds to indicate that the sender is accepted.
 7. The client issues another command, which specifies the mail's recipient.
 8. The server responds indicating the recipient is accepted.
 9. The client then issues a DATA command.
10. The server responds asking the client to proceed.
11. The client transfers the email.

The protocol is very simple. In the following example SMTP
session, mail.example.net is the client, and the server is mail.example.com (C and S
indicate whether the client or server is sending, respectively):
  S: 220 mail.example.com SMTP server ready
  C: HELO mail.example.net
  S: 250 Hello mail.example.net [192.0.2.67]
  C: MAIL FROM:<alice@example.net>
  S: 250 OK
  C: RCPT TO:<bob@example.com>
  S: 250 Accepted
  C: DATA
  S: 354 Enter message, ending with "." on a line by itself
  C: Subject: Re: The Cake
  C: Date: Fri, 03 May 2019 02:31:20 +0000
  C:
  C: Do NOT forget to bring the cake!
  C: .
  S: 250 OK
  C: QUIT
  S: 221 closing connection
Everything the server sends is in reply to the client's commands, except for the
first line. The first line is simply in response to the client connecting.

You may notice that each of the client's commands start with a four-letter word.
Each one of the server's responses starts with a three-digit code.

The common client commands we use are as follows:

     HELO is used for the client to identify itself to the server.
     MAIL is used to specify who is sending the mail.
     RCPT is used to specify a recipient.
     DATA is used to initiate the transfer of the actual email. This email should
     include both headers and a body.
     QUIT is used to end the session.


The server response codes used in a successful email transfer are the following:

     220: The service is ready
     250: The requested command was accepted and completed successfully
     354: Start sending the message
     221: The connection is closing


Error codes vary between providers, but they are generally in the 500 range.

SMTP servers can also send replies spanning multiple lines. In this case, the very
last line begins with the response code followed by a space. All preceding lines
begin with the response code followed by a dash. The following example
illustrates a multiline response after attempting to deliver to a mailbox that does
not exist:
  C: MAIL FROM:<alice@example.net>
  S: 250 OK
  C: RCPT TO:<not-a-real-user@example.com>
  S: 550-The account you tried to deliver to does not
  S: 550-exist. Please double-check the recipient's
  S: 550 address for typos and try again.


Note that some servers validate that the recipient address is valid before replying
to the RCPT command, but many servers only validate the recipient address after
the client sends the email using the DATA command.

Although that explains the basics of the protocol used to send mail, we still must
consider the format of the email itself. This is covered next.
The format of an email
If we make an analogy to physical mail, the SMTP commands MAIL FROM and RCPT
TO address the envelope. Those commands give the SMTP server information on

how the mail is to be delivered. In this analogy, the DATA command would be the
letter inside the envelope. As it's common to address a physical letter inside an
envelope, it's also common to repeat the delivery information in the email, even
though it was already sent to the SMTP server through the MAIL and RCPT
commands.

A simple email may look like the following:
  From: Alice Doe <alice@example.net>
  To: Bob Doe <bob@example.com>
  Subject: Re: The Cake
  Date: Fri, 03 May 2019 02:31:20 +0000

  Hi Bob,

  Do NOT forget to bring the cake!

  Best,
  Alice


The entire email is transmitted to an SMTP server following the DATA command.
A single period on an otherwise blank line is transmitted to indicate the end of
the email. If the email contains any line beginning with a period, the SMTP
client should replace it with two consecutive periods. This prevents the client
from indicating the email is over prematurely. The SMTP server knows that any
line beginning with two periods should be replaced with a single period.

The email itself can be divided into two parts—the header and the body. The two
parts are delineated by the first blank line.

The header part consists of various headers that indicate properties of the
email. From, To, Subject, and Date are the most common headers.

The body part of the email is simply the message being sent.

With a basic understanding of the email format, we are now ready to begin
writing a simple C program to send emails.
A simple SMTP client program
With a basic understanding of both SMTP and the email format, we are ready to
program a simple email client. Our client takes as inputs: the destination email
server, the recipient's address, the sender's address, the email subject line, and
the email body text.

Our program begins by including the necessary headers with the following
statements:
  /*smtp_send.c*/

  #include "chap08.h"
  #include <ctype.h>
  #include <stdarg.h>


We also define the following two constants to make buffer allocation and
checking easier:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

  #define MAXINPUT 512
  #define MAXRESPONSE 1024


Our program needs to prompt the user for input several times. This is required to
get the email server's hostname, the recipient's address, and so on. C provides the
gets() function for this purpose but gets() is deprecated in the latest C standard.
Therefore, we implement our own function.

The following function, get_input(), prompts for user input:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

  void get_input(const char *prompt, char *buffer)
  {
      printf("%s", prompt);

      buffer[0] = 0;
      fgets(buffer, MAXINPUT, stdin);
      const int read = strlen(buffer);
      if (read > 0)
          buffer[read-1] = 0;
  }


The get_input() function uses fgets() to read from stdin. The buffer passed to
get_input()   is assumed to be MAXINPUT bytes, which we defined at the top of the file.

The fgets() function does not remove a newline character from the received
input; therefore, we overwrite the last character inputted with a terminating null
character.

It is also very helpful to have a function that can send formatted strings directly
over the network. We implement a function called send_format() for this purpose.
It takes a socket, a formatting string, and the additional arguments to send. You
can think of send_format() as being very similar to printf(). The difference is that
send_format() delivers the formatted text over the network instead of printing to

the screen.

The code for send_format() is as follows:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

  void send_format(SOCKET server, const char *text, ...) {
      char buffer[1024];
      va_list args;
      va_start(args, text);
      vsprintf(buffer, text, args);
      va_end(args);

      send(server, buffer, strlen(buffer), 0);

      printf("C: %s", buffer);
  }


The preceding code works by first reserving a buffer. vsprintf() is then used to
format the text into that buffer. It is up to the caller to ensure that the formatted
output doesn't exceed the reserved buffer space. We are assuming for this
program that the user is trusted, but in a production program, you would want to
add checks to prevent a buffer overflow here.

After the output text is formatted into buffer, it is sent using send(). We also print
the sent text to the screen. A C: is printed preceding it to indicate that the text was
sent by us, the client.

One of the trickier parts of our SMTP client is parsing the SMTP server
responses. This is important because the SMTP client must not issue a second
command until a response is received for the first command. If the SMTP client
sends a new command before the server is ready, then the server will likely
terminate the connection.
Recall that each SMTP response starts with a three-digit code. We want to parse
out this code to check for errors. Each SMTP response is usually followed by
text that we ignore. SMTP responses are typically only one line long, but they
can sometimes span multiple lines. In this case, each line up to the penultimate
line contains a dash character, -, directly following the three-digit response code.

To illustrate how multiline responses work, consider the following two responses
as equivalent:
  /*response 1*/

  250 Message received!

  /*response 2*/

  250-Message
  250 received!


It is important that our program recognizes multiline responses; it must not
mistakenly treat a single multiline response as separate responses.

We implement a function called parse_response() for this purpose. It takes in a
null-terminated response string and returns the parsed response code. If no code
is found or the response isn't complete, then 0 is returned instead. The code for
this function is as follows:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

  int parse_response(const char *response) {
      const char *k = response;
      if (!k[0] || !k[1] || !k[2]) return 0;
      for (; k[3]; ++k) {
          if (k == response || k[-1] == '\n') {
              if (isdigit(k[0]) && isdigit(k[1]) && isdigit(k[2])) {
                  if (k[3] != '-') {
                      if (strstr(k, "\r\n")) {
                          return strtol(k, 0, 10);
                      }
                  }
              }
          }
      }
      return 0;
  }


The parse_response() function begins by checking for a null terminator in the first
three characters of the response. If a null is found there, then the function can
return immediately because response isn't long enough to constitute a valid SMTP
response.
It then loops through the response input string. The loop goes until a null-
terminating character is found three characters out. Each loop, isdigit() is used to
see whether the current character and the next two characters are all digits. If so,
the fourth character, k[3], is checked. If k[3] is a dash, then the response continues
onto the next line. However, if k[3] isn't a dash, then k[0] represents the beginning
of the last line of the SMTP response. In this case, the code checks if the line
ending has been received; strstr() is used for this purpose. It the line ending was
received, the code uses strtol() to convert the response code to an integer.

If the code loops through response() without returning, then 0 is returned, and the
client needs to wait for more input from the SMTP server.

With parse_response() out of the way, it is useful to have a function that waits until
a particular response code is received over the network. We implement a
function called wait_on_response() for this purpose, which begins as follows:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

  void wait_on_response(SOCKET server, int expecting) {
      char response[MAXRESPONSE+1];
      char *p = response;
      char *end = response + MAXRESPONSE;

      int code = 0;


In the preceding code, a response buffer variable is reserved for storing the SMTP
server's response. A pointer, p, is set to the beginning of this buffer; p will be
incremented to point to the end of the received data, but it starts at response since
no data has been received yet. An end pointer variable is set to the end of the
buffer, which is useful to ensure we do not attempt to write past the buffer end.

Finally, we set code = 0 to indicate that no response code has been received yet.

The wait_on_response() function then continues with a loop as follows:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      do {
          int bytes_received = recv(server, p, end - p, 0);
          if (bytes_received < 1) {
              fprintf(stderr, "Connection dropped.\n");
              exit(1);
          }

          p += bytes_received;
          *p = 0;
          if (p == end) {
              fprintf(stderr, "Server response too large:\n");
              fprintf(stderr, "%s", response);
              exit(1);
          }

          code = parse_response(response);

      } while (code == 0);


The beginning of the preceding loop uses recv() to receive data from the SMTP
server. The received data is written at point p in the response array. We are careful
to use end to make sure received data isn't written past the end of response.

After recv() returns, p is incremented to the end of the received data, and a null
terminating character is set. A check for p == end ensures that we haven't written
to the end of the response buffer.

Our function from earlier, parse_response(), is used to check whether a full SMTP
response has been received. If so, then code is set to that response. If not, then code
is equal to 0, and the loop continues to receive additional data.

After the loop terminates, the wait_on_response() function checks that the received
SMTP response code is as expected. If so, the received data is printed to the
screen, and the function returns. The code for this is as follows:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      if (code != expecting) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Error from server:\n");
          fprintf(stderr, "%s", response);
          exit(1);
      }

      printf("S: %s", response);
  }


That concludes the wait_on_response() function. This function proves very useful,
and it is needed after every command sent to the SMTP server.

We also define a function called connect_to_host(), which attempts to open a TCP
connection to a given hostname and port number. This function is extremely
similar to the code we've used in the previous chapters.

First getaddrinfo() is used to resolve the hostname and getnameinfo() is then used to
print the server IP address. The following code achieves those two purposes:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

  SOCKET connect_to_host(const char *hostname, const char *port) {
      printf("Configuring remote address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;
      struct addrinfo *peer_address;
      if (getaddrinfo(hostname, port, &hints, &peer_address)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }

      printf("Remote address is: ");
      char address_buffer[100];
      char service_buffer[100];
      getnameinfo(peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen,
              address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer),
              service_buffer, sizeof(service_buffer),
              NI_NUMERICHOST);
      printf("%s %s\n", address_buffer, service_buffer);


A socket is then created with socket(), as shown in the following code:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET server;
      server = socket(peer_address->ai_family,
              peer_address->ai_socktype, peer_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(server)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }


Once the socket has been created, connect() is used to establish the connection.
The following code shows the use of connect() and the end of the connect_to_host()
function:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      printf("Connecting...\n");
      if (connect(server,
                  peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "connect() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }
      freeaddrinfo(peer_address);

      printf("Connected.\n\n");

      return server;
  }


Don't forget to call freeaddrinfo() to free the memory allocated for the server
address, as shown by the preceding code.
Finally, with those helper functions out of the way, we can begin on main(). The
following code defines main() and initializes Winsock if required:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

  int main() {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


See Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, for more information about
initializing Winsock and establishing connections.

Our program can proceed by prompting the user for an SMTP hostname. This
hostname is stored in hostname, and our connect_to_host() function is used to open a
connection. The following code shows this:
       /*smtp_send.c continued*/

       char hostname[MAXINPUT];
       get_input("mail server: ", hostname);

       printf("Connecting to host: %s:25\n", hostname);

       SOCKET server = connect_to_host(hostname, "25");


After the connection is established, our SMTP client must not issue any
commands until the server responds with a 220 code. We use wait_on_response() to
wait for this with the following code:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

       wait_on_response(server, 220);


Once the server is ready to receive commands, we must issue the HELO command.
The following code sends the HELO command and waits for a 250 response code:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

       send_format(server, "HELO HONPWC\r\n");
       wait_on_response(server, 250);


HELOshould be followed by the SMTP client's hostname; however, since we are
probably running this client from a development machine, it's likely we don't
have a hostname setup. For this reason, we simply send HONPWC, although any
arbitrary string can be used. If you are running this client from a server, then you
should change the HONPWC string to a domain that points to your server.

Also, note the line ending used in the preceding code. The line ending used by
SMTP is a carriage return character followed by a line feed character. In C, this
is represented by "\r\n".

Our program then prompts the user for the sending and receiving addresses and
issues the appropriate SMTP commands. This is done using get_input() to prompt
the user, send_format() to issue the SMTP commands, and wait_on_response() to
receive the SMTP server's response:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      char sender[MAXINPUT];
      get_input("from: ", sender);
      send_format(server, "MAIL FROM:<%s>\r\n", sender);
      wait_on_response(server, 250);

      char recipient[MAXINPUT];
      get_input("to: ", recipient);
      send_format(server, "RCPT TO:<%s>\r\n", recipient);
      wait_on_response(server, 250);


After the sender and receiver are specified, the next step in the SMTP is to issue
the DATA command. The DATA command instructs the server to listen for the actual
email. It is issued by the following code:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      send_format(server, "DATA\r\n");
      wait_on_response(server, 354);


Our client program then prompts the user for an email subject line. After the
subject line is specified, it can send the email headers: From, To, and Subject. The
following code does this:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      char subject[MAXINPUT];
      get_input("subject: ", subject);

      send_format(server, "From:<%s>\r\n", sender);
      send_format(server, "To:<%s>\r\n", recipient);
      send_format(server, "Subject:%s\r\n", subject);


It is also useful to add a date header. Emails use a special format for dates. We
can make use of the strftime() function to format the date properly. The following
code formats the date into the proper email header:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      time_t timer;
      time(&timer);

      struct tm *timeinfo;
      timeinfo = gmtime(&timer);

      char date[128];
      strftime(date, 128, "%a, %d %b %Y %H:%M:%S +0000", timeinfo);

      send_format(server, "Date:%s\r\n", date);


In the preceding code, the time() function is used to get the current date and time,
and gmtime() is used to convert it into a timeinfo struct. Then, strftime() is called to
format the data and time into a temporary buffer, date. This formatted string is
then transmitted to the SMTP server as an email header.

After the email headers are sent, the email body is delineated by a blank line.
The following code sends this blank line:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      send_format(server, "\r\n");


We can then prompt the user for the body of the email using get_input(). The
body is transmitted one line at a time. When the user finishes their email, they
should enter a single period on a line by itself. This indicates both to our client
and the SMTP server that the email is finished.

The following code sends user input to the server until a single period is
inputted:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      printf("Enter your email text, end with \".\" on a line by itself.\n");

      while (1) {
          char body[MAXINPUT];
          get_input("> ", body);
          send_format(server, "%s\r\n", body);
          if (strcmp(body, ".") == 0) {
              break;
          }
      }


If the mail was accepted by the SMTP server, it sends a 250 response code. Our
client then issues the QUIT command and checks for a 221 response code. The 221
response code indicates that the connection is terminating as shown in the
following code:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      wait_on_response(server, 250);

      send_format(server, "QUIT\r\n");
      wait_on_response(server, 221);


Our SMTP client concludes by closing the socket, cleaning up Winsock (if
required), and exiting as shown here:
  /*smtp_send.c continued*/

      printf("\nClosing socket...\n");
      CLOSESOCKET(server);

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      printf("Finished.\n");
      return 0;
  }


That concludes smtp_send.c.

You can compile and run smtp_send.c on Windows with MinGW using the
following:
  gcc smtp_send.c -o smtp_send.exe -lws2_32
  smtp_send.exe


On Linux or macOS, compiling and running smtp_send.c is done by the following:
  gcc smtp_send.c -o smtp_send
  ./smtp_send


The following screenshot shows the sending of a simple email using smtp_send.c:
If you're doing a lot of testing, you may find it tedious to type in the email each
time. In that case, you can automate it by putting your text in a file and using the
cat utility to read it into smtp_send. For example, you may have the email.txt file as
follows:
  /*email.txt*/

  mail-server.example.net
  bob@example.com
  alice@example.net
  Re: The Cake
  Hi Alice,
  What about the cake then?

  Bob
  .


With the program input stored in email.txt, you can send an email using the
following command:
  cat email.txt | ./smtp_send


Hopefully, you can send some test emails with smtp_send. There are, however, a
few obstacles you may run into. Your ISP may block outgoing emails from your
connection, and many email servers do not accept mail from residential IP
address blocks. See the Spam-blocking pitfalls section later in the chapter for
more information.

Although smtp_send is useful for sending simple text-based messages, you may be
wondering how to add formatting to your email. Perhaps you want to send files
as attachments. The next section addresses these issues.
Enhanced emails
The emails we've been looking at so far have been only simple text. Modern
email usage often demands fancier formatted emails.

We can control the content type of an email using the Content-Type header. This is
very similar to the content type header used by HTTP, which we covered in Chapt
er 7, Building a Simple Web Server.


If the content type header is missing, a content type of text/plain is assumed by
default. Therefore, the Content-Type header in the following email is redundant:
  From: Alice Doe <alice@example.net>
  To: Bob Doe <bob@example.com>
  Subject: Re: The Cake
  Date: Fri, 03 May 2019 02:31:20 +0000
  Content-Type: text/plain

  Hi Bob,

  Do NOT forget to bring the cake!

  Best,
  Alice


If you want formatting support in your email, which is common today, you
should use a text/html content type. In the following email, HTML is used to add
emphasis:
  From: Alice Doe <alice@example.net>
  To: Bob Doe <bob@example.com>
  Subject: Re: The Cake
  Date: Fri, 03 May 2019 02:31:20 +0000
  Content-Type: text/html

  Hi Bob,<br>
  <br>
  Do <strong>NOT</strong> forget to bring the cake!<br>
  <br>
  Best,<br>
  Alice<br>


Not all email clients support HTML emails. For this reason, it may be useful to
encode your message as both plaintext and HTML. The following email uses
this technique:
  From: Alice Doe <alice@example.net>
  To: Bob Doe <bob@example.com>
  Subject: Re: The Cake
  Date: Fri, 03 May 2019 02:31:20 +0000
  MIME-Version: 1.0
  Content-Type: multipart/alternative; boundary="SEPARATOR"

  This is a message with multiple parts in MIME format.
  --SEPARATOR
  Content-Type: text/plain

  Hi Bob,

  Do NOT forget to bring the cake!

  Best,
  Alice
  --SEPARATOR
  Content-Type: text/html

  Hi Bob,<br>
  <br>
  Do <strong>NOT</strong> forget to bring the cake!<br>
  <br>
  Best,<br>
  Alice<br>
  --SEPARATOR--


The preceding email example uses two headers to indicate that it's a multipart
message. The first one, MIME-Version: 1.0, indicates which version
of Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) we're using. MIME is
used for all emails that aren't simply plaintext.

The second header, Content-Type: multipart/alternative; boundary="SEPARATOR", specifies
that we're sending a multipart message. It also specifies a special boundary
character sequence that delineates the parts of the email. In our example,
SEPARATOR is used as the boundary. It is important that the boundary not appear in

the email text or attachments. In practice, boundary specifiers are often long
randomly generated strings.

Once the boundary has been set, each part of the email begins with --SEPARATOR on
a line by itself. The email ends with --SEPARATOR--. Note that each part of the
message gets its own header section, specific to only that part. These header
sections are used to specify the content type for each part.

It is also often useful to attach files to email, which we will cover now.
Email file attachments
If a multipart email is being sent, a part can be designated as an attachment using
the Content-Disposition header. See the following example:
  From: Alice Doe <alice@example.net>
  To: Bob Doe <bob@example.com>
  Subject: Re: The Cake
  Date: Fri, 03 May 2019 02:31:20 +0000
  MIME-Version: 1.0
  Content-Type: multipart/alternative; boundary="SEPARATOR"

  This is a message with multiple parts in MIME format.
  --SEPARATOR
  Content-Type: text/plain

  Hi Bob,

  Please see the attached text file.

  Best,
  Alice
  --SEPARATOR
  Content-Disposition: attachment; filename=my_file.txt;
    modification-date="Fri, 03 May 2019 02:26:51 +0000";
  Content-Type: application/octet-stream
  Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

  VGhpcyBpcyBhIHNpbXBsZSB0ZXh0IG1lc3NhZ2Uu
  --SEPARATOR--


The preceding example includes a file called my_file.txt. SMTP is a purely text-
based protocol; therefore, any attachments that may include binary data need to
be encoded into a text format. Base64 encoding is commonly used for this
purpose. In this example, the header, Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64, specifies
that we are going to use Base64 encoding.

The content of my_file.txt is This is a simple text message. That sentence encodes to
Base64 as VGhpcyBpcyBhIHNpbXBsZSB0ZXh0IG1lc3NhZ2Uu as seen in the preceding code.
Spam-blocking pitfalls
It can be much harder to send emails today than it was in the past. Spam has
become a major problem, and every provider is taking actions to curb it.
Unfortunately, many of these actions can also make it much more difficult to
send legitimate emails.

Many residential ISPs don't allow outgoing connections on port 25. If your
residential provider blocks port 25, then you won't be able to establish an SMTP
connection. In this case, you may consider renting a virtual private server to run
this chapter's code.

Even if your ISP does allow outgoing connections on port 25, many SMTP
servers won't accept mail from a residential IP address. Of the servers that do,
many will send those emails straight into a spam folder.

For example, if you attempt to deliver an email to Gmail, you may get a
response similar to the following:
  550-5.7.1 [192.0.2.67] The IP you're using to send mail is not authorized
  550-5.7.1 to send email directly to our servers. Please use the SMTP
  550-5.7.1 relay at your service provider instead. Learn more at
  550 5.7.1 https://support.google.com/mail/?p=NotAuthorizedError


Another spam-blocking measure that may trip you up is Sender Policy
Framework (SPF). SPF works by listing which servers can send mail for a
given domain. If a sending server isn't on the SPF list, then receiving SMTP
servers reject their mail.

DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) is a measure to authenticate email using
digital signatures. Many popular email providers are more likely to treat non-
DKIM mail as spam. DKIM signing is very complicated and out of scope for
this book.

Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance
(DMARC) is a technique used for domains to publish whether SPF and/or
DKIM is required of mail originating from them, among other things.
Most commercial email servers use SPF, DKIM, and DMARC. If you're sending
email without these, your email will likely be treated as spam. If you're sending
email in opposition to these, your email will either be rejected outright or labeled
as spam.

Finally, many popular providers assign a reputation to sending domains and
servers. This puts potential emails senders in a catch-22 situation. Email can't be
delivered without building a reputation, but a reputation can't be built without
successfully delivering lots of emails. As spam continues to be a major problem,
we may soon come to a time where only big-name, trusted SMTP servers can
operate with each other. Let's hope it doesn't come to that!

If your program needs to send email reliably, you should likely consider using an
email service provider. One option is to allow an SMTP relay to do the final
delivery. A potentially easier option is to use a mail sending service that operates
an HTTP API.
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at how email is delivered over the internet. SMTP, the
protocol responsible for email delivery, was studied in some depth. We then
constructed a simple program to send short emails using SMTP.

We looked at the email format too. We saw how MIME could be used to send
multipart emails with file attachments.

We also saw how sending emails over the modern internet is full of pitfalls.
Many of these stems from attempts to block spam. Techniques used by
providers, such as blocking residential IP addresses, SPF, DKIM, DMARC, and
IP address reputation monitoring, may make it difficult for our simple program
to deliver email reliably.

In the next chapter, Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and
OpenSSL, we look at secure web connections using HTTPS.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge from this chapter:

 1. What port does SMTP operate on?
 2. How do you determine which SMTP server receives mail for a given
    domain?
 3. How do you determine which SMTP server sends mail for a given
    provider?
 4. Why won't an SMTP server relay mail without authentication?
 5. How are binary files sent as email attachments when SMTP is a text-based
    protocol?

The answers can be found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Further reading
For more information about SMTP and email formats, please refer to the
following links:

    RFC 821: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc821)
    RFC 2822: Internet Message Format (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2822)
Section 3 - Understanding Encrypted
Protocols and OpenSSL
In this section, the reader will learn about the secure, encrypted protocols that
are common on the modern web.

The following chapters are in this section:

        , Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL
Chapter 9


Chapter 10  , Implementing a Secure Web Server

Chapter 11  , Establishing SSH Connections
Loading Secure Web Pages with
HTTPS and OpenSSL
In this chapter, we'll learn how to initiate secure connections to web servers
using Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS). HTTPS provides several
benefits over HTTP. HTTPS gives an authentication method to identify servers
and detect impostors. It also protects the privacy of all transmitted data and
prevents interceptors from tampering with or forging transmitted data.

In HTTPS, communication is secured using Transport Layer Security (TLS).
In this chapter, we'll learn how to use the popular OpenSSL library to provide
TLS functionality.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     Background information about HTTPS
     Types of encryption ciphers
     How servers are authenticated
     Basic OpenSSL usage
     Creating a simple HTTPS client
Technical requirements
The example programs from this chapter can be compiled using any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW for Windows and GCC for Linux and macOS.
You also need to have the OpenSSL library installed. See Appendices B, Setting Up
Your C Compiler on Windows, Appendices C, Setting Up Your C Compiler on
Linux, and Appendices D, Setting Up Your C Compiler on macOS, for compiler
setup and OpenSSL installation.

The code for this book can be found at https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-P
rogramming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap09


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
While compiling on Windows, each example program requires linking with the
Winsock library. This can be accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to gcc.

Each example also needs to be linked against the OpenSSL libraries, libssl.a and
libcrypto.a. This is accomplished by passing -lssl -lcrypto to gcc.


We provide the exact commands needed to compile each example as it is
introduced.

All of the example programs in this chapter require the same header files and C
macros that we developed in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. For
brevity, we put these statements in a separate header file, chap09.h, which we can
include in each program. For an explanation of these statements, please refer to C
hapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.


The content of chap09.h begins by including the necessary networking header
files. The code for this follows:
  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

  #else
  #include <sys/types.h>
  #include <sys/socket.h>
  #include <netinet/in.h>
  #include <arpa/inet.h>
  #include <netdb.h>
  #include <unistd.h>
  #include <errno.h>

  #endif


We also define some macros to assist with writing portable code like so:
  /*chap09.h continued*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

  #else
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
  #define SOCKET int
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
  #endif


Finally, chap09.h includes some additional headers, including the headers for the
OpenSSL library. This is shown in the following code:
  /*chap09.h continued*/

  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <string.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <time.h>

  #include <openssl/crypto.h>
  #include <openssl/x509.h>
  #include <openssl/pem.h>
  #include <openssl/ssl.h>
  #include <openssl/err.h>
HTTPS overview
HTTPS provides security to HTTP. We covered HTTP in Chapter 6, Building a
Simple Web Client. HTTPS secures HTTP by using TLS over TCP on port 443.
TLS is a protocol that can provide security to any TCP connection.

TLS is the successor to Secure Socket Layer (SSL), an earlier protocol also
used by HTTPS. TLS and SSL are compatible, and most of the information in
this chapter also applies to SSL. Generally, establishing an HTTPS connection
involves the client and server negotiating which protocol to use. The ideal
outcome is that the client and server agree on the most secure, mutually
supported protocol and cipher.

When we talk about protocol security, we are generally looking for the following
three things:

    Authentication: We need a way to prevent impostors from posing as
    legitimate communication partners. TLS provides peer authentication
    methods for this reason.
    Encryption: TLS uses encryption to obfuscate transmitted data. This
    prevents an eavesdropper from correctly interpreting intercepted data.
    Integrity: TLS also ensures that received data has not been tampered with
    or otherwise forged.

HTTP is most commonly used to transmit web pages. The text on a web page is
first encoded as Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). HTML provides
formatting, layout, and styling to web pages. HTTP is then used to transmit the
HTML, and HTTP itself is transmitted over a TCP connection.

Visually, an HTTP session is encapsulated like the following:
TLS works inside TCP to provide a secure communication channel. HTTPS is
then basically the same as the HTTP protocol, but it is sent inside a TLS
channel.

Visually, HTTPS is encapsulated in the following manner:




Of course, the same abstraction still applies if HTTP is used to transmit an
image, video, or other data instead of HTML.

Do keep in mind that these abstractions are accurate at the conceptual level, but
some details transcend layers. For example, some HTTPS headers are used to
refer to security parameters of how TLS should be applied. In general, though, it
is reasonable to think of TLS as securing the TCP connection used by HTTPS.

Although TLS is most commonly used for HTTPS security, TLS is also used to
secure many other TCP-based protocols. The email protocol, SMTP, which we
covered in Chapter 8, Making Your Program Send Email, is also commonly
secured by TLS.

Before going into further detail about using TLS, it is useful to understand some
necessary background information on encryption.
Encryption basics
Encryption is a method of encoding data so that only authorized parties can
access it. Encryption does not prevent interception or interference, but it denies
the original data to a would-be attacker.

Encryption algorithms are called ciphers. An encryption cipher takes
unencrypted data as input, referred to as plaintext. The cipher produces
encrypted data, called ciphertext, as its output. The act of converting plaintext
into ciphertext is called encryption, and the act of reversing it back is called
decryption.

Modern ciphers use keys to control the encryption and decryption of data. Keys
are typically relatively short, pseudo-random data sequences. Ciphertext
encrypted with a given key cannot be decrypted without the proper key.

Broadly, there are two categories of ciphers—symmetric and asymmetric. A
symmetric cipher uses the same key for both encryption and decryption, while
an asymmetric cipher uses two different keys.
Symmetric ciphers
The following diagram illustrates a symmetric cipher:




In the preceding diagram, the plaintext Hello! is encrypted using a symmetric
cipher. A secret key is used with the cipher to produce a ciphertext. This
ciphertext can then be transmitted over an insecure channel, and eavesdroppers
cannot decipher it without knowledge of the secret key. The privileged receiver
of the ciphertext uses the decryption algorithm and secret key to convert it back
into plaintext.

Some symmetric ciphers in general use (not just for TLS) are the following:

     American Encryption Standard (AES), also known as Rijndael
     Camellia
     Data Encryption Standard (DES)
     Triple DES
     International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA)
     QUAD
     RC4
     Salsa20, Chacha20
     Tiny Encryption Algorithm (TEA)

One issue with symmetric encryption is that the same key must be known to both
the sender and receiver. Generating and transmitting this key securely poses a
problem. How can the key be sent between parties if they don't already have a
secure communication channel? If they do already have a secure communication
channel, why is encryption needed in the first place?

Key exchange algorithms attempt to address these problems. Key exchange
algorithms work by allowing both communicating parties to generate the same
secret key. In general, the parties first agree on a public, non-secret key. Then,
each party generates its own secret key and combines it with the public key.
These combined keys are exchanged. Each party then adds its own secret to the
combined keys to arrive at a combined, secret key. This combined, secret key is
then known to both parties, but not derivable by an eavesdropper.

The most common key exchange algorithm in use today is the Diffie-Hellman
key exchange algorithm.

While key exchange algorithms are resistant against eavesdroppers, they are not
resilient to interception. In the case of interception, an attacker could stand in the
middle of a key exchange, while posing as each corresponding party. This is
called a man-in-the-middle attack.

Asymmetric ciphers can be used to address some of these problems.
Asymmetric ciphers
Asymmetric encryption, also known as public-key encryption, attempts to
solve the key exchange and authentication problems of symmetric encryption.
With asymmetric encryption, two keys are used. One key can encrypt data, while
the other key can decrypt it. These keys are generated together and related
mathematically. However, deriving one key from the other after the fact is not
possible.

The following diagram shows an asymmetric cipher:




Establishing a secure communication channel with asymmetric encryption is
easier. Each party can generate its own asymmetric encryption keys. The
encryption key can then be transmitted without the worry of interception, while
the decryption key is kept private. In this scheme, these keys are referred to as
the Public Key and the Private Key, respectively.

The Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) cipher is one of the first public-key ciphers
and is widely used today. Newer elliptic-curve cryptography (ECC) algorithms
promise greater efficiency and are quickly gaining market share.

Asymmetric ciphers are also used to implement digital signatures. A digital
signature is used to verify the authenticity of data. Digital signatures are created
by using a private key to generate a signature for a document. The public key
can then be used to verify that the document was signed by the holder of the
private key.

The following diagram illustrates a digital signing and verifying process:




TLS uses a combination of these methods to achieve security.
How TLS uses ciphers
Digital signatures are essential in TLS; they are used to authenticate servers.
Without digital signatures, a TLS client wouldn't be able to differentiate between
an authentic server and an impostor.

TLS can also use digital signatures to authenticate the client, although this is
much less common in practice. Most web applications either don't care about
client authentication, or use other simpler methods, such as passwords.

In theory, asymmetric encryption could be used to protect an entire
communication channel. However, in practice, modern asymmetric ciphers are
inefficient and only able to protect small amounts of data. For this reason,
symmetric ciphers are preferred whenever possible. TLS uses asymmetric
ciphers only to authenticate the server. TLS uses a key exchange algorithm and
symmetric ciphers to protect the actual communication.

Vulnerabilities are found for encryption algorithms all the time. It is, therefore,
imperative that TLS connections are able to select the best algorithms that are
mutually supported by both parties. This is done using cipher suites. A cipher
suite is a list of algorithms, generally a key exchange algorithm, a bulk
encryption algorithm, and a message authentication algorithm (MAC).

When a TLS connection is first established, the TLS client sends a list of
preferred cipher suites to the server. The TLS server will select one of these
cipher suites to be used for the connection. If the server doesn't support any of
the cipher suites given by the client, then a secure TLS connection cannot be
established.

With some background information about security out of the way, we can
discuss TLS in more detail.
The TLS protocol
After a TCP connection is established, the TLS handshake is initiated by the
client. The client sends a number of specifications to the server, including which
versions of SSL/TLS it is running, which cipher suites it supports, and which
compression methods it would like to use.

The server selects the highest mutually supported version of SSL/TLS to use. It
also chooses a cipher suite and compression method from the choices given by
the client.

If the client and server do not support any cipher suite in common, then no TLS
connection can be established. This is not uncommon when using very old
browsers with newer servers.

After the basic setup is done, the server sends the client its certificate. This is
used by the client to verify that it's connected to a legitimate server. We'll discuss
more on certificates in the next section.

Once the client has verified that the server really is who it claims to be, a key
exchange is initiated. After key exchange completes, both the client and server
have a shared secret key. All further communication is encrypted using this key
and their chosen symmetric cipher.

Certificates are used to verify server identities with digital signatures. Let's
explore how they work next.
Certificates
Each HTTPS server uses one or more certificates to verify their identity. This
certificate must either be trusted by the client itself or trusted by a third party
that the client trusts. In common usages, such as web browsers, it's not really
possible to list all trusted certificates. For this reason, it's most common to
validate certificates by verifying that a trusted third party trusts them. This trust
is proven using digital signatures.

For example, a popular digital certificate authority is DigiCert Inc. Suppose that
you trust DigiCert Inc. and have stored a certificate from them locally; you then
connect to a website, example.com. You may not trust example.com, because you
haven't seen their certificate before. However, example.com shows you that their
certificate has been digitally signed by the DigiCert Inc. certificate you do trust.
Therefore, you trust example.com website's certificate too.

In practice, certificate chains can be several layers deep. As long as you can
verify digital signatures back to a certificate you trust, you are able to validate
the whole chain.

This method is the common one used by HTTPS to authenticate servers. It does
have some issues; namely, you must entirely trust the certificate authority. This
is because certificate authorities could theoretically issue a certificate to an
impostor, in which case you would be forced to trust the impostor. Certificate
authorities are careful to avoid this, as it would ruin their reputation.

The most popular certificate authorities at the time of this writing are the
following:

     IdenTrust
     Comodo
     DigiCert
     GoDaddy
     GlobalSign

The five preceding certificate authorities are responsible for over 90% of the
HTTPS certificates found on the web.

It is also possible to self-sign a certificate. In this case, no certificate authority is
used. In these cases, a client needs to somehow reliably obtain and verify a copy
of your certificate before it can be trusted.

Certificates are usually matched to domain names, but it's also possible for them
to identify other information, such as company names, address, and so on.

In the next chapter, Chapter 10, Implementing a Secure Web Server, certificates are
covered in more detail.

It's common today for one server to host many different domains, and each
domain requires its own certificate. Let's now consider how these servers know
which certificate to send.
Server name identification
Many servers host multiple domains. Certificates are tied to domains; therefore,
TLS must provide a method for the client to specify which domain it's
connecting to. You may recall that the HTTP Host header servers this purpose.
The problem is that the TLS connection should be established before the HTTP
data is sent. Therefore, the server must decide which certificate to transmit
before the HTTP Host header is received.

This is accomplished using Server Name Indication (SNI). SNI is a technique
that, when used by TLS, requires the client to indicate to the server which
domain it is attempting to connect to. The server can then find a matching
certificate to use for the TLS connection.

SNI is relatively new, and older browsers and servers do not support it. Before
SNI was popular, servers had two choices—they could either host only one
domain per IP address, or they could send certificates for all hosted domains for
each connection.

It should be noted that SNI involves sending the unencrypted domain name over
the network. This means an eavesdropper can see which host the client is
connecting to, even though they wouldn't know which resources the client is
requesting from that host. Newer protocols, such as encrypted server name
identification (ESNI), address this problem but are not widely deployed yet.

With a basic understanding of the TLS protocol, we're ready to look at the most
popular library that implements it—OpenSSL.
OpenSSL
OpenSSL is a widely used open source library that provides SSL and TLS
services to applications. We use it in this chapter for secure connections required
by HTTPS.

OpenSSL can be challenging to install. Refer to Appendices B, Setting Up Your C
Compiler on Windows, Appendices C, Setting Up Your C Compiler on Linux, and Ap
pendices D, Setting Up Your C Compiler on macOS, for more information.


You can check whether you have the OpenSSL command-line tools installed by
running the following command:
  openssl version


The following screenshot shows this on Ubuntu Linux:




You'll also need to ensure that you have the OpenSSL library installed. The
following program can be used to test this. If it compiles and runs successfully,
then you do have the OpenSSL library installed and working:
  /*openssl_version.c*/

  #include <openssl/ssl.h>

  int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
      printf("OpenSSL version: %s\n", OpenSSL_version(SSLEAY_VERSION));
      return 0;
  }


If you're using an older version of OpenSSL, you may need to replace the
OpenSSL_version() function call with SSLeay_version() instead. However, a better
solution is to just upgrade to a newer OpenSSL version.

The preceding openssl_version.c program is compiled on macOS and Linux using
the following command:
  gcc openssl_version.c -o openssl_version -lcrypto
  ./openssl_version


The following screenshot shows compiling and running openssl_version.c:




On Windows, openssl_version can be compiled using MinGW and the following
commands:
  gcc openssl_version.c -o openssl_version.exe -lcrypto
  openssl_version.exe


Once the OpenSSL library is installed and usable, we are ready to begin using
encrypted sockets.
Encrypted sockets with OpenSSL
The TLS provided by OpenSSL can be applied to any TCP socket.

Before using OpenSSL in your program, it is important to initialize it. The
following code does this:
  SSL_library_init();
  OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms();
  SSL_load_error_strings();


In the preceding code, the call to SSL_library_init() is required to initialize the
OpenSSL library. The second call (to OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms()) causes OpenSSL
to load all available algorithms. Alternately, you could load only the algorithms
you know are needed. For our purposes, it is easy to load them all. The third call,
SSL_load_error_strings(), causes OpenSSL to load error strings. This call isn't
strictly needed, but it is handy to have easily readable error messages when
something goes wrong.

Once OpenSSL is initialized, we are ready to create an SSL context. This is done
by calling the SSL_CTX_new() function, which returns an SSL_CTX object. You can
think of this object as a sort of factory for SSL/TLS connections. It holds the
initial settings that you want to use for your connections. Most programs only
need to create one SSL_CTX object, and they can reuse it for all their connections.

The following code creates the SSL context:
  SSL_CTX *ctx = SSL_CTX_new(TLS_client_method());
  if (!ctx) {
      fprintf(stderr, "SSL_CTX_new() failed.\n");
      return 1;
  }


The SSL_CTX_new() function takes one argument. We use TLS_client_method(), which
indicates that we want general-purpose, version-flexible TLS methods available.
Our client automatically negotiates the best mutually supported algorithm with
the server upon connecting.

If you're using an older version of OpenSSL, you may need to replace
                 with TLSv1_2_client_method() in the preceding code. However, a
TLS_client_method()
much better solution is to upgrade to a newer OpenSSL version.

To secure a TCP connection, you must first have a TCP connection. This TCP
connection should be established in the normal way. The following pseudo-code
shows this:
  getaddrinfo(hostname, port, hints, address);
  socket = socket(address, type, protocol);
  connect(socket, address, type);


For more information on setting up a TCP connection, refer to Chapter 3, An In-
Depth Overview of TCP Connections.

Once connect() has returned successfully, and a TCP connection is established,
you can use the following code to initiate a TLS connection:
  SSL *ssl = SSL_new(ctx);
  if (!ctx) {
      fprintf(stderr, "SSL_new() failed.\n");
      return 1;
  }

  if (!SSL_set_tlsext_host_name(ssl, hostname)) {
      fprintf(stderr, "SSL_set_tlsext_host_name() failed.\n");
      ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
      return 1;
  }

  SSL_set_fd(ssl, socket);
  if (SSL_connect(ssl) == -1) {
      fprintf(stderr, "SSL_connect() failed.\n");
      ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
      return 1;
  }


In the preceding code, SSL_new() is used to create an SSL object. This object is used
to track the new SSL/TLS connection.

We then use SSL_set_tlsext_host_name() to set the domain for the server we are
trying to connect to. This allows OpenSSL to use SNI. This call is optional, but
without it, the server does not know which certificate to send in the case that it
hosts more than one site.

Finally, we call SSL_set_fd() and SSL_connect() to initiate the new TLS/SSL
connection on our existing TCP socket.
It is possible to see which cipher the TLS connection is using. The following
code shows this:
  printf ("SSL/TLS using %s\n", SSL_get_cipher(ssl));


Once the TLS connection is established, data can be sent and received using
SSL_write() and SSL_read(), respectively. These functions are used in a nearly

identical manner as the standard socket send() and recv() functions.

The following example shows transmitting a simple message over a TLS
connection:
  char *data = "Hello World!";
  int bytes_sent = SSL_write(ssl, data, strlen(data));


Receiving data, done with SSL_read(), is shown in the following example:
  char read[4096];
  int bytes_received = SSL_read(ssl, read, 4096);
  printf("Received: %.*s\n", bytes_received, read);


When the connection is finished, it's important to free the used resources by
calling SSL_shutdown() and SSL_free(ssl). This is shown in the following code:
  SSL_shutdown(ssl);
  CLOSESOCKET(socket);
  SSL_free(ssl);


When you're done with an SSL context, you should also call SSL_CTX_free(). In our
case, it looks like this:
  SSL_CTX_free(ctx);


If your program requires authentication of the connected peer, it is important to
look at the certificates sent during the TLS initialization. Let's consider that next.
Certificates
Once the TLS connection is established, we can use the SSL_get_peer_certificate()
function to get the server's certificate. It's also easy to print the certificate subject
and issuer, as shown in the following code:
      X509 *cert = SSL_get_peer_certificate(ssl);
      if (!cert) {
          fprintf(stderr, "SSL_get_peer_certificate() failed.\n");
          return 1;
      }

      char *tmp;
      if (tmp = X509_NAME_oneline(X509_get_subject_name(cert), 0, 0)) {
          printf("subject: %s\n", tmp);
          OPENSSL_free(tmp);
      }

      if (tmp = X509_NAME_oneline(X509_get_issuer_name(cert), 0, 0)) {
          printf("issuer: %s\n", tmp);
          OPENSSL_free(tmp);
      }

      X509_free(cert);


OpenSSL automatically verifies the certificate during the TLS/SSL handshake.
You can get the verification results using the SSL_get_verify_result() function. Its
usage is shown in the following code:
  long vp = SSL_get_verify_result(ssl);
  if (vp == X509_V_OK) {
      printf("Certificates verified successfully.\n");
  } else {
      printf("Could not verify certificates: %ld\n", vp);
  }


If SSL_get_verify_result() returns X509_V_OK, then the certificate chain was verified by
OpenSSL and the connection can be trusted. If SSL_get_verify_result() does not
return X509_V_OK, then HTTPS authentication has failed, and the connection should
be abandoned.

In order for OpenSSL to successfully verify the certificate, we must tell it which
certificate authorities we trust. This can be done by using the
SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations() function. It must be passed the filename that stores
all of the trusted root certificates. Assuming your trusted certificates are in
trusted.pem, the following code sets this up:
  if (!SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations(ctx, "trusted.pem", 0)) {
      fprintf(stderr, "SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations() failed.\n");
      ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
      return 1;
  }


Deciding which root certificates to trust isn't easy. Each operating system
provides a list of trusted certificates, but there is no general, easy way to import
these lists. Using the operating system's default list is also not always
appropriate for every application. For these reasons, certificate verification has
been omitted from the examples in this chapter. However, it is absolutely critical
that it be implemented appropriately in order for your HTTPS connections to be
secure.

In addition to validating the certificate's signatures, it is also important to
validate that the certificate is actually valid for the particular server you're
connected with! Newer versions of OpenSSL provide functions to help with this,
but with older versions of OpenSSL, you're on your own. Consult the OpenSSL
documentation for more information.

We've now covered enough background information about TLS and OpenSSL
that we're ready to tackle a concrete example program.
A simple HTTPS client
To bring the concepts of this chapter together, we build a simple HTTPS client.
This client can connect to a given HTTPS web server and request the root
document /.

Our program begins by including the needed chapter header, defining main(), and
initializing Winsock as shown here:
  /*https_simple.c*/

  #include "chap09.h"

  int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


We then initialize the OpenSSL library with the following code:
     /*https_simple.c continued*/

      SSL_library_init();
      OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms();
      SSL_load_error_strings();


The SSL_load_error_strings() function call is optional, but it's very useful if we run
into problems.

We can also create an OpenSSL context. This is done by calling SSL_CTX_new() as
shown by the following code:
     /*https_simple.c continued*/

      SSL_CTX *ctx = SSL_CTX_new(TLS_client_method());
      if (!ctx) {
          fprintf(stderr, "SSL_CTX_new() failed.\n");
          return 1;
      }


If we were going to do certificate verification, this would be a good place to
include the SSL_CTX_load_verify_locations() function call, as explained in the
Certificates section of this chapter. We're omitting certification verification in
this example for simplicity, but it is important to include it in real-world
applications.

Our program then checks that a hostname and a port number was passed in on
the command line like so:
  /*https_simple.c continued*/

      if (argc < 3) {
          fprintf(stderr, "usage: https_simple hostname port\n");
          return 1;
      }

      char *hostname = argv[1];
      char *port = argv[2];


The standard HTTPS port number is 443. Our program lets the user specify any
port number, which can be useful for testing.

We then configure the remote address for the socket connection. This code uses
the same technique that we've been using since Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview
of TCP connections. The code for this is as follows:
  /*https_simple.c continued*/

      printf("Configuring remote address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;
      struct addrinfo *peer_address;
      if (getaddrinfo(hostname, port, &hints, &peer_address)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "getaddrinfo() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }

      printf("Remote address is: ");
      char address_buffer[100];
      char service_buffer[100];
      getnameinfo(peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen,
              address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer),
              service_buffer, sizeof(service_buffer),
              NI_NUMERICHOST);
      printf("%s %s\n", address_buffer, service_buffer);


We continue to create the socket using a call to socket(), and we connect it using
the connect() function as follows:
  /*https_simple.c continued*/

      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET server;
      server = socket(peer_address->ai_family,
              peer_address->ai_socktype, peer_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(server)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }

      printf("Connecting...\n");
      if (connect(server,
                  peer_address->ai_addr, peer_address->ai_addrlen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "connect() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          exit(1);
      }
      freeaddrinfo(peer_address);

      printf("Connected.\n\n");


At this point, a TCP connection has been established. If we didn't need
encryption, we could communicate over it directly. However, we are going to
use OpenSSL to initiate a TLS/SSL connection over our TCP connection. The
following code creates a new SSL object, sets the hostname for SNI, and initiates
the TLS/SSL handshake:
  /*https_simple.c continued*/

      SSL *ssl = SSL_new(ctx);
      if (!ctx) {
          fprintf(stderr, "SSL_new() failed.\n");
          return 1;
      }

      if (!SSL_set_tlsext_host_name(ssl, hostname)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "SSL_set_tlsext_host_name() failed.\n");
          ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
          return 1;
      }

      SSL_set_fd(ssl, server);
      if (SSL_connect(ssl) == -1) {
          fprintf(stderr, "SSL_connect() failed.\n");
          ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
          return 1;
      }


The preceding code is explained in the Encrypted Sockets with OpenSSL section
earlier in this chapter.

The call to SSL_set_tlsext_host_name() is optional, but useful if you may be
connecting to a server that hosts multiple domains. Without this call, the server
wouldn't know which certificates are relevant to this connection.

It is sometimes useful to know which cipher suite the client and server agreed
upon. We can print the selected cipher suite with the following:
  /*https_simple.c continued*/

      printf("SSL/TLS using %s\n", SSL_get_cipher(ssl));


It is also useful to see the server's certificate. The following code prints the
server's certificate:
  /*https_simple.c continued*/

      X509 *cert = SSL_get_peer_certificate(ssl);
      if (!cert) {
          fprintf(stderr, "SSL_get_peer_certificate() failed.\n");
          return 1;
      }

      char *tmp;
      if ((tmp = X509_NAME_oneline(X509_get_subject_name(cert), 0, 0))) {
          printf("subject: %s\n", tmp);
          OPENSSL_free(tmp);
      }

      if ((tmp = X509_NAME_oneline(X509_get_issuer_name(cert), 0, 0))) {
          printf("issuer: %s\n", tmp);
          OPENSSL_free(tmp);
      }

      X509_free(cert);


The certificate subject should match the domain we're connecting to. The issuer
should be a certificate authority that we trust. Note that the preceding code does
not validate the certificate. Refer to the Certificates section in this chapter for
more information.

We can then send our HTTPS request. This request is the same as if we were
using plain HTTP. We begin by formatting the request into a buffer and then
sending it over the encrypted connection using SSL_write(). The following code
shows this:
  /*https_simple.c continued*/

      char buffer[2048];

      sprintf(buffer, "GET / HTTP/1.1\r\n");
      sprintf(buffer + strlen(buffer), "Host: %s:%s\r\n", hostname, port);
      sprintf(buffer + strlen(buffer), "Connection: close\r\n");
      sprintf(buffer + strlen(buffer), "User-Agent: https_simple\r\n");
      sprintf(buffer + strlen(buffer), "\r\n");

      SSL_write(ssl, buffer, strlen(buffer));
      printf("Sent Headers:\n%s", buffer);


For more information about the HTTP protocol, please refer back to Chapter 6,
Building a Simple Web Client.
Our client now simply waits for data from the server until the connection is
closed. This is accomplished by using SSL_read() in a loop. The following code
receives the HTTPS response:
  /*https_simple.c continued*/

      while(1) {
          int bytes_received = SSL_read(ssl, buffer, sizeof(buffer));
              if (bytes_received < 1) {
                  printf("\nConnection closed by peer.\n");
                  break;
              }

             printf("Received (%d bytes): '%.*s'\n",
                     bytes_received, bytes_received, buffer);
      }


The preceding code also prints any data received over the HTTPS connection.
Note that it does not parse the received HTTP data, which would be more
complicated. See the https_get.c program in this chapter's code repository for a
more advanced program that does parse the HTTP response.

Our simple client is almost done. We only have to shut down the TLS/SSL
connection, close the socket, and clean up. This is done by the following code:
  /*https_simple.c continued*/

      printf("\nClosing socket...\n");
      SSL_shutdown(ssl);
      CLOSESOCKET(server);
      SSL_free(ssl);
      SSL_CTX_free(ctx);

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif

      printf("Finished.\n");
      return 0;
  }


That concludes https_simple.c.

You should be able to compile and run it on Windows using MinGW and the
following commands:
  gcc https_simple.c -o https_simple.exe -lssl -lcrypto -lws2_32
  https_simple example.org 443


If you're using certain older versions of OpenSSL, you may also need an
additional linker option—-lgdi32.

Compiling and executing on macOS and Linux can be done using the following:
  gcc https_simple.c -o https_simple -lssl -lcrypto
  ./https_simple example.org 443


If you run into linker errors, you should check that your OpenSSL library is
properly installed. You may find it helpful to attempt compiling the
openssl_version.c program first.


The following screenshot shows successfully compiling https_simple.c and using
it to connect to example.org:
The https_simple program should serve as an elementary example of the
techniques of connecting as an HTTPS client. These same techniques can be
applied to any TCP connection.

It's easy to apply these techniques to some of the programs developed earlier in
the book, such as tcp_client and web_get.

It is also worth mentioning that, while TLS works only with TCP
connections, Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) aims to provide
many of the same guarantees for User Datagram Protocol (UDP) datagrams.
OpenSSL provides support for DTLS too.
Other examples
A few other examples are included in this chapter's repository. They are the
following:

     tls_client.c: This is tcp_client.c from Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP
     Connections, but it has been modified to make TLS connections.
     https_get.c: This is the web_get.c program from Chapter 6, Building a Simple
     Web Client, but it has been modified for HTTPS. You can think of it as the
     extended version of https_simple.c.
     tls_get_cert.c: This is like https_simple.c, but it simply prints the connected
     server's certificate and exits.

Keep in mind that none of the examples in this chapter perform certification
verification. This is an important step that must be added before using these
programs in the field.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the features that HTTPS provides over HTTP,
such as authentication and encryption. We saw that HTTPS is really just HTTP
over a TLS connection and that TLS can be applied to any TCP connection.

We also learned about basic encryption concepts. We saw how asymmetric
ciphers use two keys, and how this allows for digital signatures. The very basics
of certificates were covered, and we explored some of the difficulties with
verifying them.

Finally, we worked through a concrete example that established a TLS
connection to an HTTPS server.

This chapter was all about HTTPS clients, but in the next chapter, we focus on
how HTTPS servers work.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge from this chapter:

 1. What port does HTTPS typically operate on?
 2. How many keys does symmetric encryption use?
 3. How many keys does asymmetric encryption use?
 4. Does TLS use symmetric or asymmetric encryption?
 5. What is the difference between SSL and TLS?
 6. What purpose do certificates fill?

Answers are in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Further reading
For more information about HTTPS and OpenSSL, please refer to the following:

    OpenSSL documentation (https://www.openssl.org/docs/)
    RFC 5246: The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol (https://tools.ietf
    .org/html/rfc5246)
Implementing a Secure Web Server
In this chapter, we will build a simple HTTPS server program. This serves as the
counterpart to the HTTPS client we worked on in the previous chapter.

HTTPS is powered by Transport Layer Security (TLS). HTTPS servers, unlike
HTTPS clients, are expected to identify themselves with certificates. We'll cover
how to listen for HTTPS connections, provide certificates, and send an HTTP
response over TLS.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     HTTPS overview
     HTTPS certificates
     HTTPS server setup with OpenSSL
     Accepting HTTPS connections
     Common problems
     OpenSSL alternatives
     Direct TLS termination alternatives
Technical requirements
This chapter continues where Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS
and OpenSSL, left off. This chapter continues to use the OpenSSL library. It is
imperative that you have the OpenSSL library installed and that you know the
basics of programming with OpenSSL. Refer to Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web
Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL, for basic information about OpenSSL.

The example programs from this chapter can be compiled using any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW for Windows and GCC for Linux and
macOS. You also need to have the OpenSSL library installed. See Appendix B,
Setting Up Your C Compiler on Windows; Appendix C, Setting Up Your C Compiler
on Linux; and Appendix D, Setting Up Your C Compiler on macOS, for compiler
setup and OpenSSL installation.

The code for this book can be found at https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-P
rogramming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter by using the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap10


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
When compiling on Windows, each example program requires linking with the
Winsock library. This is accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to gcc.

Each example also needs to be linked against the OpenSSL libraries, libssl.a and
libcrypto.a. This is accomplished by passing -lssl -lcrypto to GCC.


We provide the exact commands needed to compile each example as it is
introduced.

All of the example programs in this chapter require the same header files and C
macros that we developed in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. For
brevity, we put these statements in a separate header file, chap10.h, which we can
include in each program. For an explanation of these statements, please refer to C
hapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs.


The content of chap10.h begins by including the required networking header files.
The code for this is as follows:
  /*chap10.h*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

  #else
  #include <sys/types.h>
  #include <sys/socket.h>
  #include <netinet/in.h>
  #include <arpa/inet.h>
  #include <netdb.h>
  #include <unistd.h>
  #include <errno.h>

  #endif


We also define some macros to assist with writing portable code:
  /*chap10.h continued*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

  #else
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
  #define SOCKET int
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
  #endif


Finally, chap10.h includes the additional headers required by this chapter's
programs:
  /*chap10.h continued*/

  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <string.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <time.h>

  #include <openssl/crypto.h>
  #include <openssl/x509.h>
  #include <openssl/pem.h>
#include <openssl/ssl.h>
#include <openssl/err.h>
HTTPS and OpenSSL summary
We begin with a quick review of the HTTPS protocol, as covered in Chapter 9,
Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL. However, we do
recommend that you work through Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with
HTTPS and OpenSSL, before beginning this chapter.

HTTPS uses TLS to add security to HTTP. You will recall from Chapter 6,
Building a Simple Web Client, and Chapter 7, Building a Simple Web Server, that
HTTP is a text-based protocol that works over TCP on port 80. The TLS protocol
can be used to add security to any TCP-based protocol. Specifically, TLS is used
to provide security for HTTPS. So in a nutshell, HTTPS is simply HTTP with
TLS. The default HTTPS port is 443.

OpenSSL is a popular open source library that provides functionality for
TLS/SSL and HTTPS. We use it in this book to provide the methods
needed to implement HTTPS clients and servers.

Generally, HTTPS connections are first made using TCP sockets. Once the TCP
connection is established, OpenSSL is used to negotiate a TLS connection over
the open TCP connection. From that point forward, OpenSSL functions are used
to send and receive data over the TLS connection.

An important part of communication security is being able to trust that the
connection is to the intended party. No amount of data encryption helps if you
have connected to an impostor. TLS uses certificates to prevent against
connecting to impostors and man-in-the-middle attacks.

We now need to understand certificates in more detail before we can proceed
with our HTTPS server.
Certificates
Certificates are an important part of the TLS protocol. Although certificates can
be used on both the client and server side, HTTPS generally only uses server
certificates. These certificates identify to the client that they are connected to a
trusted server.

Without certificates, a client wouldn't be able to tell whether it was connected to
the intended server or an impostor server.

Certificates work using a chain-of-trust model. Each HTTPS client has a few
certificate authorities that they explicitly trust, and certificate authorities offer
services where they digitally sign certificates. This service is usually done for a
small fee, and usually only after some simple verification of the requester.

When an HTTPS client sees a certificate signed by an authority it trusts, then it
also trusts that certificate. Indeed, these chains of trust can run deep. For
example, most certificate authorities also allow resellers. In these cases, the
certificate authority signs an intermediate certificate to be used by the reseller.
The reseller then uses this intermediate certificate to sign new certificates.
Clients trust the intermediate certificates because they are signed by trusted
certificate authorities, and clients trust the certificates signed by resellers because
they trust the intermediate certificates.

Certificate authorities commonly offer two types of validation. Domain
validation is where a signed certificate is issued after simply verifying that the
certificate recipient can be reached at the given domain. This is usually done by
having the certificate requester temporarily modify a DNS record, or reply to an
email sent to their whois contact.

Let's Encrypt is a relatively new certificate issuer that issues certificates for
free. They do this using an automated model. Domain validation is done by
having the certificate requester serve a small file over HTTP or HTTPS.

Domain validation is the most common type of validation. An HTTPS server
using domain validation assures an HTTPS client that they are connected to the
domain that they think they are. It implies that their connection wasn't silently
hijacked or otherwise intercepted.

Certificate authorities also offer Extended Validation (EV) certificates. EV
certificates are only issued after the authority verifies the recipient's identity.
This is usually done using public records and a phone call.

For public-facing HTTPS applications, it is important that you obtain a
certificate from a recognized certificate authority. However, this can sometimes
be tedious, and it is often much more convenient to obtain a self-signed
certificate for development and testing purposes. Let's do that now.
Self-signed certificates with OpenSSL
Certificates signed by recognized authorities are essential to establish the chain
of trust needed for public websites. However, it is much easier to obtain a self-
signed certificate for testing or development.

It is also acceptable to use a self-signed certificate for certain private
applications where the client can be deployed with a copy of the certificate, and
trust only that certificate. This is called certificate pinning. Indeed, when used
properly, certificate pinning can be more secure than using a certificate authority.
However, it is not appropriate for public-facing websites.

We require a certificate to test our HTTPS server. We use a self-signed certificate
because they are the easiest to obtain. The downside to this method is that web
browsers won't trust our server. We can get around this by clicking through a few
warnings in the web browser.

OpenSSL provides tools to make self-signing certificates very easy.

The basic command to self-sign a certificate is as follows:
  openssl req -x509 -newkey rsa:2048 -nodes -sha256 -keyout key.pem \
  -out cert.pem -days 365


OpenSSL asks questions about what to put on the certificate, including the
subject, your name, company, location, and so on. You can use the defaults on all
of these as this doesn't matter for our testing purposes.

The preceding command places the new certificate in cert.pem and the key for it
in key.pem. Our HTTPS server needs both files. cert.pem is the certificate that gets
sent to the connected client, and key.pem provides our server with the encryption
key that proves that it owns the certificate. Keeping this key secret is imperative.

Here is a screenshot showing the generation of a new self-signed certificate:
You can also use OpenSSL to view a certificate. The following command does
this:
  openssl x509 -text -noout -in cert.pem


If you're on Windows using MSYS, you may get garbled line endings from the
previous command. If so, try using unix2dos to fix it, as shown by the following
command:
  openssl x509 -text -noout -in cert.pem | unix2dos


Here is what a typical self-signed certificate looks like:
Now that we have a usable certificate, we are ready to begin our HTTPS server
programming.
HTTPS server with OpenSSL
Let's go over some basics of using the OpenSSL library in server applications
before beginning a concrete example.

Before OpenSSL can be used, it must be initialized. The following code
initializes the OpenSSL library, loads the requisite encryption algorithms, and
loads useful error strings:
  SSL_library_init();
  OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms();
  SSL_load_error_strings();


Refer to the previous Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and
OpenSSL, for more information.

Our server also needs to create an SSL context object. This object works as a sort
of factory from which we can create TLS/SSL connections.

The following code creates the SSL_CTX object:
  SSL_CTX *ctx = SSL_CTX_new(TLS_server_method());
  if (!ctx) {
      fprintf(stderr, "SSL_CTX_new() failed.\n");
      return 1;
  }


If you're using an older version of OpenSSL, you may need to
replace TLS_server_method() with TLSv1_2_server_method() in the preceding code.
However, a better solution is to upgrade to a newer OpenSSL version.

After the SSL_CTX object is created, we can set it to use our self-signed certificate
and key. The following code does this:
  if (!SSL_CTX_use_certificate_file(ctx, "cert.pem" , SSL_FILETYPE_PEM)
  || !SSL_CTX_use_PrivateKey_file(ctx, "key.pem", SSL_FILETYPE_PEM)) {
      fprintf(stderr, "SSL_CTX_use_certificate_file() failed.\n");
      ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
      return 1;
  }


That concludes the minimal OpenSSL setup needed for an HTTPS server.
The server should then listen for incoming TCP connections. This was covered
in detail in Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections.

After a new TCP connection is established, we use the socket returned by accept()
to create our TLS/SSL socket.

First, a new SSL object is created using our SSL context from earlier. The
following code demonstrates this:
  SSL *ssl = SSL_new(ctx);
  if (!ctx) {
      fprintf(stderr, "SSL_new() failed.\n");
      return 1;
  }


The SSL object is then linked to our open TCP socket using SSL_set_fd().
The SSL_accept() function is called to establish the TLS/SSL connection. The
following code demonstrates this:
  SSL_set_fd(ssl, socket_client);
  if (SSL_accept(ssl) <= 0) {
      fprintf(stderr, "SSL_accept() failed.\n");
      ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
      return 1;
  }

  printf ("SSL connection using %s\n", SSL_get_cipher(ssl));


You may notice that this code is very similar to the HTTPS client code from Chapt
er 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL. The only real

differences are in the setup of the SSL context object.

Once the TLS connection is established, data can be sent and received using
SSL_write() and SSL_read(). These functions replace the send() and recv() functions
used with TCP sockets.

When the connection is finished, it is important to free resources, as shown by
the following code:
  SSL_shutdown(ssl);
  CLOSESOCKET(socket_client);
  SSL_free(ssl);


When your program is finished accepting new connections, you should also free
the SSL context object. The following code shows this:
  SSL_CTX_free(ctx);


With an understanding of the basics out of the way, let's solidify our knowledge
by implementing a simple example program.
Time server example
In this chapter, we develop a simple time server that displays the time to an
HTTPS client. This program is an adaptation of time_server.c from Chapter 2,
Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, which served the time over plain HTTP. Our
program begins by including the chapter header, defining main(), and initializing
Winsock on Windows. The code for this is as follows:
  /*tls_time_server.c*/

  #include "chap10.h"

  int main() {

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSADATA d;
      if (WSAStartup(MAKEWORD(2, 2), &d)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Failed to initialize.\n");
          return 1;
      }
  #endif


The OpenSSL library is then initialized with the following code:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

      SSL_library_init();
      OpenSSL_add_all_algorithms();
      SSL_load_error_strings();


An SSL context object must be created for our server. This is done using a call to
SSL_CTX_new(). The following code shows this call:

  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

      SSL_CTX *ctx = SSL_CTX_new(TLS_server_method());
      if (!ctx) {
          fprintf(stderr, "SSL_CTX_new() failed.\n");
          return 1;
      }


If you're using an older version of OpenSSL, you may need to replace
TLS_server_method() with TLSv1_2_server_method() in the preceding code. However, you
should probably upgrade to a newer OpenSSL version instead.

Once the SSL context has been created, we can associate our server's certificate
with it. The following code sets the SSL context to use our certificate:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

      if (!SSL_CTX_use_certificate_file(ctx, "cert.pem" , SSL_FILETYPE_PEM)
      || !SSL_CTX_use_PrivateKey_file(ctx, "key.pem", SSL_FILETYPE_PEM)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "SSL_CTX_use_certificate_file() failed.\n");
          ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);
          return 1;
      }


Make sure that you've generated a proper certificate and key. Refer to the Self-
signed certificate with OpenSSL section from earlier in this chapter.

Once the SSL context is configured with the proper certificate, our program
creates a listening TCP socket in the normal way. It begins with a call to
getaddrinfo() and socket(), as shown in the following code:


  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

      printf("Configuring local address...\n");
      struct addrinfo hints;
      memset(&hints, 0, sizeof(hints));
      hints.ai_family = AF_INET;
      hints.ai_socktype = SOCK_STREAM;
      hints.ai_flags = AI_PASSIVE;

      struct addrinfo *bind_address;
      getaddrinfo(0, "8080", &hints, &bind_address);


      printf("Creating socket...\n");
      SOCKET socket_listen;
      socket_listen = socket(bind_address->ai_family,
              bind_address->ai_socktype, bind_address->ai_protocol);
      if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_listen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "socket() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


The socket created by the preceding code is bound to the listening address with
bind(). The listen() function is used to set the socket in a listening state. The
following code demonstrates this:
    /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

      printf("Binding socket to local address...\n");
      if (bind(socket_listen,
                  bind_address->ai_addr, bind_address->ai_addrlen)) {
          fprintf(stderr, "bind() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }
      freeaddrinfo(bind_address);
      printf("Listening...\n");
      if (listen(socket_listen, 10) < 0) {
          fprintf(stderr, "listen() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
          return 1;
      }


If the preceding code isn't familiar, please refer to Chapter 3, An In-Depth
Overview of TCP Connections.

Note that the preceding code sets the listening port number to 8080. The standard
port for HTTPS is 443. It is often more convenient to test with a high port
number, since low port numbers require special privileges on some operating
systems.

Our server uses a while loop to accept multiple connections. Note that this isn't
true multiplexing, as only one connection is handled at a time. However, it
proves convenient for testing purposes to be able to handle multiple connections
serially. Our self-signed certificate causes mainstream browsers to reject our
connection on the first try. The connection only succeeds after an exception is
added. By having our code loop, it makes adding this exception easier.

Our while loop begins by using accept() to wait for new connections. This is done
by the following code:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

   while (1) {

          printf("Waiting for connection...\n");
          struct sockaddr_storage client_address;
          socklen_t client_len = sizeof(client_address);
          SOCKET socket_client = accept(socket_listen,
                  (struct sockaddr*) &client_address, &client_len);
          if (!ISVALIDSOCKET(socket_client)) {
              fprintf(stderr, "accept() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
              return 1;
          }


Once the connection is accepted, we use getnameinfo() to print out the client's
address. This is sometimes useful for debugging purposes. The following code
does this:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

          printf("Client is connected... ");
          char address_buffer[100];
          getnameinfo((struct sockaddr*)&client_address,
                  client_len, address_buffer, sizeof(address_buffer), 0, 0,
                  NI_NUMERICHOST);
          printf("%s\n", address_buffer);


Once the TCP connection is established, an SSL object needs to be created. This is
done with a call to SSL_new(), as shown by the following code:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

          SSL *ssl = SSL_new(ctx);
          if (!ctx) {
              fprintf(stderr, "SSL_new() failed.\n");
              return 1;
          }


The SSL object is associated with the open socket by a call to SSL_set_fd(). Then,
a TLS/SSL connection can be initialized with a call to SSL_accept(). The following
code shows this:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

          SSL_set_fd(ssl, socket_client);
          if (SSL_accept(ssl) <= 0) {
              fprintf(stderr, "SSL_accept() failed.\n");
              ERR_print_errors_fp(stderr);

              SSL_shutdown(ssl);
              CLOSESOCKET(socket_client);
              SSL_free(ssl);

              continue;
          }

          printf ("SSL connection using %s\n", SSL_get_cipher(ssl));


In the preceding code, the call to the SSL_accept() function can fail for many
reasons. For example, if the connected client doesn't trust our certificate, or the
client and server can't agree on a cipher suite, then the call to SSL_accept() fails.
When it fails, we just clean up the allocated resources and use continue to repeat
our listening loop.

Once the TCP and TLS/SSL connections are fully open, we use SSL_read() to
receive the client's request. Our program ignores the content of this request. This
is because our program only serves the time. It doesn't matter what the client has
asked for—our server responds with the time.

The following code uses SSL_read() to wait on and read the client's request:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

          printf("Reading request...\n");
          char request[1024];
          int bytes_received = SSL_read(ssl, request, 1024);
          printf("Received %d bytes.\n", bytes_received);


The following code uses SSL_write() to transmit the HTTP headers to the client:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

          printf("Sending response...\n");
          const char *response =
              "HTTP/1.1 200 OK\r\n"
              "Connection: close\r\n"
              "Content-Type: text/plain\r\n\r\n"
              "Local time is: ";
          int bytes_sent = SSL_write(ssl, response, strlen(response));
          printf("Sent %d of %d bytes.\n", bytes_sent, (int)strlen(response));


The time() and ctime() functions are then used to format the current time. Once
the time is formatted in time_msg, it is also sent to the client using SSL_write(). The
following code shows this:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

          time_t timer;
          time(&timer);
          char *time_msg = ctime(&timer);
          bytes_sent = SSL_write(ssl, time_msg, strlen(time_msg));
          printf("Sent %d of %d bytes.\n", bytes_sent, (int)strlen(time_msg));


Finally, after the data is transmitted to the client, the connection is closed, and
the loop repeats. The following code shows this:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

          printf("Closing connection...\n");
          SSL_shutdown(ssl);
          CLOSESOCKET(socket_client);
          SSL_free(ssl);
      }


If the loop terminates, it would be useful to close the listening socket and clean
up the SSL context, as demonstrated by the following code:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

      printf("Closing listening socket...\n");
      CLOSESOCKET(socket_listen);
      SSL_CTX_free(ctx);


Finally, Winsock should be cleaned up if necessary:
  /*tls_time_server.c continued*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
      WSACleanup();
  #endif


      printf("Finished.\n");

      return 0;
  }


That concludes tls_time_server.c.

You can compile and run the program using the following commands on macOS
or Linux:
  gcc tls_time_server.c -o tls_time_server -lssl -lcrypto
  ./tls_time_server


On Windows, compiling and running the program is done with the following
commands:
  gcc tls_time_server.c -o tls_time_server.exe -lssl -lcrypto -lws2_32
  tls_time_server


If you have linker errors, please be sure that the OpenSSL library is installed
correctly. You may find it helpful to attempt to compile openssl_version.c from Chap
ter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL.


The following screenshot shows what running tls_time_server might look like:
You can connect to the time server by navigating your web browser to
https://127.0.0.1:8080. Upon the first connection, your browser will reject the self-
signed certificate. The following screenshot shows what this rejection looks like
in Firefox:
To access the time server, you need to add an exception in the browser. The
method for this is different in each browser, but generally, there is an
Advanced button that leads to an option to either add a certificate exception or
otherwise proceed with the insecure connection.

Once the browser connection is established, you will be able to see the current
time as given by our tls_time_server program:
The tls_time_server program proved useful to show how a TLS/SSL server can be
set up without getting bogged down in the details of actualizing a complete
HTTPS server. However, this chapter's code repository also includes a more
substantial HTTPS server.
A full HTTPS server
Included in this chapter's code repository is https_server.c. This program is a
modification of web_server.c from Chapter 7, Building a Simple Web Server. It can
be used to serve a simple static website over HTTPS.

In the https_server.c program, the basic TLS/SSL connection is set up and
established the same way as shown in tls_time_server.c. Once the secure
connection is established, the connection is simply treated as HTTP.

           is compiled using the same technique as for tls_time_server. The
https_server
following screenshot shows how to compile and run https_server:




Once https_server is running, you can connect to it by navigating your web
browser to https://127.0.0.1:8080. You will likely need to add a security exception
when connecting for the first time. The code is set up to serve the static pages
from the chap07 directory.

The following screenshot was taken of a web browser connected to https_server:
This chapter's example programs illustrate the basics of HTTPS servers.
However, implementing a genuinely robust HTTPS server does involve
additional challenges. Let's consider some of these now.
HTTPS server challenges
This chapter should serve only as an introduction to TLS/SSL server
programming. There is much more to learn about secure network programming.
Before deploying a secure HTTPS server with OpenSSL, it is essential to review
all the OpenSSL documentation carefully. Many OpenSSL functions have edge
cases that were ignored in the illustrative code for this chapter.

Multiplexing can also be complicated with OpenSSL. In typical TCP servers, we
have been using the select() function to indicate when data is available to be
read. The select() function works directly on the TCP socket. Using select() on a
server secured with TLS/SSL can be tricky. This is because select() indicates
when data is available at the TCP level. This usually, but not always, indicates
that data is available to be read with SSL_read(). It is important that you carefully
consult the OpenSSL documentation for SSL_read() if you are going to use it with
select(). The example program in this chapter ignores these possibilities for

reasons of simplicity.

There are also alternatives to OpenSSL. Let's consider some of them now.
OpenSSL alternatives
Although OpenSSL is one of the oldest and most widely deployed libraries
implementing TLS, many alternative libraries have sprung up in recent years.
Some of these alternatives aim to offer better features, performance, or quality
control compared to OpenSSL.

The following table contains a number of alternative open source TLS libraries:

 TLS Library                 Website
 cryptlib                    https://www.cryptlib.com/


 GnuTLS                      https://www.gnutls.org/


 LibreSSL                    https://www.libressl.org/


 mbed TLS                    https://tls.mbed.org/


 Network Security            https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Project
                             s/NSS
 Services
 s2n                         https://github.com/awslabs/s2n


 wolfSSL                     https://www.wolfssl.com/




There are also alternatives to doing TLS termination directly in your application,
and this can simplify program design. Let's consider this next.
Alternatives to TLS
Getting everything right when implementing an HTTPS server can prove
difficult, and missing even a minor detail can compromise security entirely.

As an alternative to using TLS directly in our server itself, it is sometimes a
better idea to use a reverse proxy server. A reverse proxy server can be
configured to accept secure connections from clients and then forward these
connections as plain HTTP to your program.

Nginx and Apache are two popular open source servers that can work well as
HTTPS reverse proxies.

This setup is illustrated by the following diagram:




A reverse proxy server configured in this way is also called a TLS termination
proxy.

An even better alternative may be to create your program using the CGI or
FastCGI standard. In this case, your program communicates directly with a
standard web server. The web server handles all of the HTTPS and HTTP
details. This can greatly simplify program design, and, in some cases, reduce
maintenance costs too.

If you do use an off-the-shelf HTTPS server, it is still important to use caution. It
can be easy to inadvertently compromise security through misconfiguration.
Summary
In this chapter, we considered the HTTPS protocol from the server's perspective.
We covered how certificates work, and we showed the method for generating a
self-signed certificate with OpenSSL.

Once we had a certificate, we learned how to use the OpenSSL library to listen
for TLS/SSL connections. We used this knowledge to implement a simple server
that displays the current time over HTTPS.

We also discussed some of the pitfalls and complexity of implementing HTTPS
servers. Many applications may benefit from side-stepping the implementation
of HTTPS and relying on a reverse proxy instead.

In the next chapter, Chapter 11, Establishing SSH Connections with libssh, we will
look at another secure protocol, Secure Shell (SSH).
Questions
Try these questions to test the knowledge you have acquired from this chapter:

 1. How does a client decide whether it should trust a server's certificate?
 2. What is the main issue with self-signed certificates?
 3. What can cause SSL_accept() to fail?
 4. Can select() be used to multiplex connections for HTTPS servers?

The answers to these questions can be found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Further reading
For more information about HTTPS and OpenSSL, please refer to the following:

    OpenSSL documentation (https://www.openssl.org/docs/)
    RFC 5246: The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2 (https
    ://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246)
    Let's Encrypt (https://letsencrypt.org/)
Establishing SSH Connections with
libssh
This chapter is all about programming with the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol.
SSH is a secure network protocol used to authenticate with remote servers, grant
command-line access, and securely transfer files.

SSH is widely used for the configuration and management of remote servers.
Oftentimes, web servers aren't connected to monitors or keyboards. For many of
these servers, SSH provides the only method of command-line access and
administration.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     SSH protocol overview
     The libssh library
     Establishing a connection
     SSH authentication methods
     Executing a remote command
     File transfers
Technical requirements
The example programs from this chapter can be compiled using any modern C
compiler. We recommend MinGW for Windows and GCC for Linux and
macOS. You also need to have the libssh library installed. See Appendix B, Setting
Up Your C Compiler on Windows, Appendix C, Setting Up Your C Compiler on
Linux, and Appendix D, Setting Up Your C Compiler on macOS, for compiler setup
and libssh installation.

The code for this book can be found at https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-P
rogramming-with-C.


From the command-line, you can download the code for this chapter by using
the following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap11


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.

Each example needs to be linked against the libssh library. This is accomplished
by passing the -lssh option to gcc.

We provide the exact commands needed to compile each example as it is
introduced.

For brevity, we use a standard header file with each example program in this
chapter. This header includes the other needed headers in one place. Its contents
are as follows:
  /*chap11.h*/

  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <string.h>

  #include <libssh/libssh.h>
The SSH protocol
Most servers providing a service (such as websites and emails) over the modern
internet aren't attached to keyboards or monitors. Even when servers do have
local input/output hardware, remote access is often much more convenient.

Various protocols have been used to provide remote command-line access to
servers. One of the first such protocols was Telnet. With Telnet, a client
remotely connects to a server using plaintext over TCP port 23. The server
provides more-or-less direct access to the operating system command-line
through this Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) connection. The client
sends plaintext commands to the server, and the server executes these
commands. The command-line output is sent back from the server to the client.

Telnet has a major security shortcoming: it does not encrypt any data sent over
the network. Even user passwords are sent as plaintext when using Telnet. This
means that any network eavesdropper could obtain user credentials!

The SSH protocol has now largely replaced Telnet. The SSH protocol works
over TCP using port 22. SSH uses strong encryption to protect against
eavesdropping.

SSH allows clients to verify servers' identities using public-key authentication.
Without public-key authentication of the server, an impostor could masquerade
as a legitimate server and attempt to trick a client into connecting. Once
connected, the client would send its credentials to the impostor server.

SSH also provides many methods for client authentication with severs. These
include sending a password or using public-key authentication. We look at these
methods in detail later.

SSH is a complicated protocol. So, instead of attempting to implement it
ourselves, we use an existing library to provide the needed functionality.
libssh
libsshis a widely used open source C library implementing the SSH protocol. It
allows us to remotely execute commands and transfer files using the SSH
protocol.

libsshis structured in a way that abstracts network connections. We won't need to
bother with the low-level networking APIs we've been using so far.
The libssh library handles hostname resolution and creation of the needed TCP
sockets for us.
Testing out libssh
Before continuing with this chapter, it is essential that you have the libssh library
installed and available. Please refer to Appendix B, Setting Up Your C Compiler on
Windows, Appendix C, Setting Up Your C Compiler on Linux, and Appendix D, Setting
Up Your C Compiler on macOS, for libssh installation.

Our first program using libssh is designed to ensure that it's installed correctly.
This program merely prints the libssh library version. The program is as follows:
  /*ssh_version.c*/

  #include "chap11.h"

  int main()
  {
      printf("libssh version: %s\n", ssh_version(0));
      return 0;
  }


You can compile and run ssh_version.c with the following commands on Windows
using MinGW:
  gcc ssh_version.c -o ssh_version.exe -lssh
  ssh_version


On Linux and macOS, the commands to compile and run ssh_version.c are as
follows:
  gcc ssh_version.c -o ssh_version -lssh
  ./ssh_version


The following screenshot shows ssh_version.c being successfully compiled and
run on Linux:
If you receive an error message about libssh.h not being found, you should check
that you have the libssh library headers in your compiler's include directory search
path. If you see an error message about an undefined reference to ssh_version,
then please check that you didn't forget to pass the -lssh option to your compiler.

The next step to understanding libssh is to establish an actual SSH connection.
Establishing a connection
Now that we've ensured that libssh is correctly installed, it's time to attempt an
actual SSH connection.

You'll need to have access to an SSH server before continuing. OpenSSH is a
popular server that is available for Linux, macOS, and Windows 10. It works
well for testing but be sure to understand the security implementations before
installing it on your device. Refer to your operating system's documentation for
more information.

If you would rather test with a remote system, Linux Virtual Private Servers
(VPS) running OpenSSH are available from many providers. They typically cost
only a few dollars a month.

Let's continue by implementing a program that uses libssh to open an SSH
connection.

We structure the rest of the programs in this chapter to take the SSH server's
hostname and port number as command-line arguments. Our program starts with
the following code, which checks these arguments:
  /*ssh_connect.c*/

  #include "chap11.h"

  int main(int argc, char *argv[])
  {
      const char *hostname = 0;
      int port = 22;
      if (argc < 2) {
          fprintf(stderr, "Usage: ssh_connect hostname port\n");
          return 1;
      }
      hostname = argv[1];
      if (argc > 2) port = atol(argv[2]);


In the preceding code, argc is checked to see whether at least the hostname was
passed in as a command-line argument. If it wasn't, a usage message is displayed
instead. Otherwise, the server's hostname is stored in the hostname variable. If a
port number was passed in, it is stored in the port variable. Otherwise, the default
port 22 is stored instead.
SSH often provides complete and total access to a server. For this reason, some
internet criminals randomly scan IP addresses for SSH connections. When they
successfully establish a connection, they attempt to guess login credentials, and
if successful, they take control of the server. These attacks aren't successful
against properly secured servers, but they are a common nuisance, nonetheless.
Using SSH on a port other than the default (22) often avoids these automated
attacks. This is one reason why we want to ensure our programs work well with
non-default port numbers.

Once our program has obtained the hostname and connection port number, we
continue by creating an SSH session object. This is done with a call to ssh_new()
as shown in the following code:
  /*ssh_connect.c continued*/

         ssh_session ssh = ssh_new();
         if (!ssh) {
             fprintf(stderr, "ssh_new() failed.\n");
             return 1;
         }
The preceding code creates a new SSH session object and stores it in
the ssh variable.

Once the SSH session is created, we need to specify some options before
completing the connection. The ssh_options_set() function is used to set options.
The following code shows setting the remote hostname and port:
  /*ssh_connect.c continued*/

         ssh_options_set(ssh, SSH_OPTIONS_HOST, hostname);
         ssh_options_set(ssh, SSH_OPTIONS_PORT, &port);


libsshincludes useful debugging tools. By setting the SSH_OPTIONS_LOG_VERBOSITY
option, we tell libssh to print almost everything it does. The following code
causes libssh to log a lot of information about which actions it takes:
  /*ssh_connect.c continued*/

         int verbosity = SSH_LOG_PROTOCOL;
         ssh_options_set(ssh, SSH_OPTIONS_LOG_VERBOSITY, &verbosity);


This logging is useful to see, but it can also be distracting. I recommend you try
it once and then disable it unless you run into problems. The rest of this chapter's
examples won't use it.
We can now use ssh_connect() to initiate the SSH connection. The following code
shows this:
  /*ssh_connect.c continued*/

      int ret = ssh_connect(ssh);
      if (ret != SSH_OK) {
          fprintf(stderr, "ssh_connect() failed.\n%s\n", ssh_get_error(ssh));
          return -1;
      }


Note that ssh_connect() returns SSH_OK on success. On failure, we use the
ssh_get_error() function to detail what went wrong.


Next, our code prints out that the connection was successful:
  /*ssh_connect.c continued*/

      printf("Connected to %s on port %d.\n", hostname, port);


The SSH protocol allows servers to send a message to clients upon connecting.
This message is called the banner. It is typically used to identify the server or
provide short access rules. We can print the banner using the following code:
  /*ssh_connect.c continued*/

      printf("Banner:\n%s\n", ssh_get_serverbanner(ssh));


This is as far as our ssh_connect.c example goes. Our program simply disconnects
and frees the SSH session before terminating. The following code concludes
ssh_connect.c:


  /*ssh_connect.c continued*/

      ssh_disconnect(ssh);
      ssh_free(ssh);

      return 0;
  }


You can compile ssh_connect.c with the following command on Windows using
MinGW:
  gcc ssh_connect.c -o ssh_connect.exe -lssh


On Linux and macOS, the command to compile ssh_connect.c is as follows:
  gcc ssh_connect.c -o ssh_connect -lssh
The following screenshot shows ssh_connect.c being successfully compiled and
run on Linux:




In the preceding screenshot, you can see that ssh_connect was able to connect to
the OpenSSH server running locally.

Now that we've established a connection, let's continue by authenticating with
the server.
SSH authentication
SSH provides authentication methods for both the server (host) and the client
(user). It should be obvious why the server must authenticate the client. The
server wants to only provide access to authorized users. Otherwise, anyone could
take over the server.

However, the client also needs to authenticate the server. If the client fails to
authenticate the server properly, then the client could be tricked into sending its
password to an impostor!

In SSH, servers are authenticated using public key encryption. Conceptually, this
is very similar to how HTTPS provides server authentication. However, SSH
doesn't typically rely on certificate authorities. Instead, when using SSH, most
clients simply keep a list of the public keys (or hashes of the public keys) that
they trust. How the clients obtain this list in the first place varies. Generally, if a
client connects to a server under trusted circumstances, then it can trust that
public key in the future too.

libsshimplements features to remember trusted servers' public keys. In this way,
once a server has been connected to and trusted once, libssh remembers that it's
trusted in the future.

Some SSH deployments also use other methods to validate SSH hosts' public
keys. For example, a Secure Shell fingerprint (SSHFP) record is a type of DNS
record used to validate SSH public keys. Its use requires secure DNS access.

Regardless of how you decide to trust (or not trust) a server's public key, you'll
need to obtain the server's public key in the first place. Let's look at how libssh
provides access to the server authentication functionality.
Server authentication
Once the SSH session is established, we can get the server's public key using the
ssh_get_server_publickey() function. The following code illustrates this function

call:
  /*ssh_auth.c excerpt*/

         ssh_key key;
         if (ssh_get_server_publickey(ssh, &key) != SSH_OK) {
             fprintf(stderr, "ssh_get_server_publickey() failed.\n%s\n",
                     ssh_get_error(ssh));
             return -1;
         }


It is often useful to obtain and display a hash of the server's SSH public key.
Users can look at hashes and compare these to known keys.
The libssh library provides the ssh_get_publickey_hash() function for this purpose.

The following code prints out an SHA1 hash of the public key obtained earlier:
  /*ssh_auth.c excerpt*/

         unsigned char *hash;
         size_t hash_len;
         if (ssh_get_publickey_hash(key, SSH_PUBLICKEY_HASH_SHA1,
                     &hash, &hash_len) != SSH_OK) {
             fprintf(stderr, "ssh_get_publickey_hash() failed.\n%s\n",
                     ssh_get_error(ssh));
             return -1;
         }

         printf("Host public key hash:\n");
         ssh_print_hash(SSH_PUBLICKEY_HASH_SHA1, hash, hash_len);


    prints SHA1 hashes using Base64. It also prepends the hash type first. For
libssh
example, the preceding code might print the following:
  Host public key hash:
  SHA1:E348CMNeCGGec/bQqEX7aocDTfI


When you've finished with the public key and hash, free their resources with the
following code:
  /*ssh_auth.c excerpt*/

         ssh_clean_pubkey_hash(&hash);
         ssh_key_free(key);


libsshprovides the ssh_session_is_known_server() function to determine whether a
server's public key is known. The following code shows an example of using this
code:
  /*ssh_auth.c excerpt*/

         enum ssh_known_hosts_e known = ssh_session_is_known_server(ssh);
         switch (known) {
             case SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_OK: printf("Host Known.\n"); break;

             case SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_CHANGED: printf("Host Changed.\n"); break;
             case SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_OTHER: printf("Host Other.\n"); break;
             case SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_UNKNOWN: printf("Host Unknown.\n"); break;
             case SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_NOT_FOUND: printf("No host file.\n"); break;

             case SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_ERROR:
                 printf("Host error. %s\n", ssh_get_error(ssh)); return 1;

             default: printf("Error. Known: %d\n", known); return 1;
         }


If the server's public key is known (previously trusted), then
ssh_session_is_known_server() returns SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_OK. Otherwise,

ssh_session_is_known_server() can return other values with various meanings.


                      indicates that the server is unknown. In this case, the user
SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_UNKNOWN

should verify the server's hash.

SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_NOT_FOUNDmeans that libssh didn't find a hosts file, and one is
created automatically. This should generally be treated in the same way as
SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_UNKNOWN.


SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_CHANGEDindicates that the server is returning a different key than
was previously known, while SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_OTHER indicates that the server is
returning a different type of key than was previously used. Either of these could
indicate a potential attack! In a real-world application, you should be more
explicit about notifying the user of these risks.

If the user has verified that a host is to be trusted, use
ssh_session_update_known_hosts() to allow libssh to save the servers public key hash.
This allows ssh_session_is_known_server() to return SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_OK for the next
connection.
The following code illustrates prompting the user to trust a connection and using
ssh_session_update_known_hosts():


  /*ssh_auth.c excerpt*/

      if (known == SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_CHANGED ||
              known == SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_OTHER ||
              known == SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_UNKNOWN ||
              known == SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_NOT_FOUND) {
          printf("Do you want to accept and remember this host? Y/N\n");
          char answer[10];
          fgets(answer, sizeof(answer), stdin);
          if (answer[0] != 'Y' && answer[0] != 'y') {
              return 0;
          }

          ssh_session_update_known_hosts(ssh);
      }


Please see ssh_auth.c in this chapter's code repository for a working example.
Consult the libssh documentation for more information.

After the client has authenticated the server, the server needs to authenticate the
client.
Client authentication
SSH offers several methods of client authentication. These methods include the
following:

     No authentication: This allows any user to connect
     Password authentication: This requires the user to provide a username and
     password
     Public key: This uses public key encryption methods to authenticate
     Keyboard-interactive: This authenticates by having the user answer
     several prompts
     Generic Security Service Application Program Interface (GSS-API):
     This allows authentication through a variety of other services

Password authentication is the most common method, but it does have some
drawbacks. If an impostor server tricks a user into sending their password, then
that user's password is effectively compromised. Public key user authentication
doesn't suffer from this attack to the same degree. With public key
authentication, the server issues a unique challenge for each authentication
attempt. This prevents a malicious impostor server from replaying a previous
authentication to the legitimate server.

Once public key authentication is set up, libssh makes using it very simple. In
many cases, it's as easy as calling the ssh_userauth_publickey_auto() function.
However, setting up public key authentication in the first place can be a tedious
process.

Although public key authentication is more secure, password authentication is
still in common use. Password authentication is also more straightforward and
easier to test. For these reasons, we continue the examples in this chapter by
using password authentication.

Regardless of the user authentication method, the SSH server must know what
user you are trying to authenticate as. The libssh library lets us provide this
information using the ssh_set_options() function that we saw earlier. It should be
called before using ssh_connect(). To set the user, call ssh_options_set() with
SSH_OPTIONS_USER   as shown in the following code:
  ssh_options_set(ssh, SSH_OPTIONS_USER, "alice");


After the SSH session has been established, a password can be provided with the
ssh_userauth_password() function. The following code prompts for a password and

sends it to the connected SSH server:
  /*ssh_auth.c excerpt*/

      printf("Password: ");
      char password[128];
      fgets(password, sizeof(password), stdin);
      password[strlen(password)-1] = 0;

      if (ssh_userauth_password(ssh, 0, password) != SSH_AUTH_SUCCESS) {
          fprintf(stderr, "ssh_userauth_password() failed.\n%s\n",
                  ssh_get_error(ssh));
          return 0;
      } else {
          printf("Authentication successful!\n");
      }


The preceding code uses the fgets() function to obtain the password from the
user. The fgets() function always includes the newline character with the input,
which we don't want. The password[strlen(password)-1] = 0 code effectively shortens
the password by one character, thus removing the newline character.

Note that using fgets() causes the entered password to display on the screen. This
isn't secure, and it would be an improvement to hide the password while it's
being entered. Unfortunately, there isn't a cross-platform way to do this. If you're
using Linux, consider using the getpass() function in place of fgets().

See ssh_auth.c in this chapter's code repository for a working example of
authenticating with a server using user password authentication.

You can compile and run ssh_auth.c with the following commands on Windows
using MinGW:
  gcc ssh_auth.c -o ssh_auth.exe -lssh
  ssh_auth example.com 22 alice


On Linux and macOS, the commands to compile and run ssh_auth.c are as
follows:
  gcc ssh_auth.c -o ssh_auth -lssh
  ./ssh_auth example.com 22 alice
The following screenshot shows compiling ssh_auth and using it to connect to a
locally running SSH server on Linux:




In the preceding screenshot, ssh_auth was used to successfully authenticate with
the locally running SSH server. The ssh_auth program used password
authentication with the username alice and the password password123. Needless to
say, you need to change the username and password as appropriate for your SSH
server. Authentication will be successful only if you use the username and
password for an actual user account on the server you connect to.

After authenticating, we're ready to run a command over SSH.
Executing a remote command
The SSH protocol works using channels. After we've established an SSH
connection, a channel must be opened to do any real work. The advantage is that
many channels can be opened over one connection. This potentially allows an
application to do multiple things (seemingly) simultaneously.

After the SSH session is open and the user is authenticated, a channel can be
opened. A new channel is opened by calling the ssh_channel_new() function. The
following code illustrates this:
  /*ssh_command.c excerpt*/

      ssh_channel channel = ssh_channel_new(ssh);
      if (!channel) {
          fprintf(stderr, "ssh_channel_new() failed.\n");
          return 0;
      }


The SSH protocol implements many types of channels. The session channel type
is used for executing remote commands and transferring files. With libssh, we
can request a session channel by using the ssh_channel_open_session() function. The
following code shows calling ssh_channel_open_session():
  /*ssh_command.c excerpt*/

      if (ssh_channel_open_session(channel) != SSH_OK) {
          fprintf(stderr, "ssh_channel_open_session() failed.\n");
          return 0;
      }


Once the session channel is open, we can issue a command to run with the
ssh_channel_request_exec() function. The following code uses fgets() to prompt the
user for a command and ssh_channel_request_exec() to send the command to the
remote host:
  /*ssh_command.c excerpt*/

      printf("Remote command to execute: ");
      char command[128];
      fgets(command, sizeof(command), stdin);
      command[strlen(command)-1] = 0;

      if (ssh_channel_request_exec(channel, command) != SSH_OK) {
          fprintf(stderr, "ssh_channel_open_session() failed.\n");
          return 1;
      }


Once the command has been sent, our program uses ssh_channel_read() to receive
the command output. The following code loops until the entire output is read:
  /*ssh_command.c excerpt*/

      char output[1024];
      int bytes_received;
      while ((bytes_received =
                  ssh_channel_read(channel, output, sizeof(output), 0))) {
          if (bytes_received < 0) {
              fprintf(stderr, "ssh_channel_read() failed.\n");
              return 1;
          }
          printf("%.*s", bytes_received, output);
      }


The preceding code first allocates a buffer, output, to hold the received data from
the command's output. The ssh_channel_read() function returns the number of bytes
read, but it returns 0 when the read is complete or a negative number for an error.
Our code loops while ssh_channel_read() returns data.

After the entire output from the command has been received, the client should
send an end-of-file (EOF) over the channel, close the channel, and free the
channel resources. The following code shows this:
  /*ssh_command.c excerpt*/

      ssh_channel_send_eof(channel);
      ssh_channel_close(channel);
      ssh_channel_free(channel);


If your program is also done with the SSH session, be sure to call ssh_disconnect()
and ssh_free() as well.

The ssh_command.c program included in this chapter's code repository is a simple
utility that connects to a remote SSH host and executes a single command.

You can compile ssh_command.c with the following command on Windows using
MinGW:
  gcc ssh_command.c -o ssh_command.exe -lssh


On Linux and macOS, the command to compile ssh_command.c is as follows:
  gcc ssh_command.c -o ssh_command -lssh
The following screenshot shows ssh_command.c being compiled and run on Linux:




The preceding screenshot shows connecting to the local OpenSSH server and
executing the ls -l command. The ssh_command code faithfully prints the output of
that command (which is a file listing for the user's home directory).

The libssh library function ssh_channel_request_exec() is useful to execute a single
command. However, SSH also supports methods for opening a fully interactive
remote shell. Generally, a session channel is opened as shown previously. Then
the libssh library function ssh_channel_request_pty() is called to initialize a remote
shell. The libssh library provides many functions to send and receive data this
way. Please refer to the libssh documentation for more information.

Now that you're able to execute a remote command and receive its output, it may
also be useful to transfer files. Let's consider that next.
Downloading a file
The Secure Copy Protocol (SCP) provides a method to transfer files. It
supports both uploading and downloading files.

libssh makes using SCP easy. This chapter's code repository contains an example,
ssh_download.c, which shows the basic method for downloading a file over SCP

with libssh.

After the SSH session is started and the user is authenticated, ssh_download.c
prompts the user for the remote filename using the following code:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

         printf("Remote file to download: ");
         char filename[128];
         fgets(filename, sizeof(filename), stdin);
         filename[strlen(filename)-1] = 0;


A new SCP session is initialized by calling the libssh library
function ssh_scp_new(), as shown in the following code:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

         ssh_scp scp = ssh_scp_new(ssh, SSH_SCP_READ, filename);
         if (!scp) {
             fprintf(stderr, "ssh_scp_new() failed.\n%s\n",
                     ssh_get_error(ssh));
             return 1;
         }


In the preceding code, SSH_SCP_READ is passed to ssh_scp_new(). This specifies that we
are going to use the new SCP session for downloading files. The
SSH_SCP_WRITE option would be used to upload files. The libssh library also provides
the SSH_SCP_RECURSIVE option to assist with uploading or downloading entire
directory trees.

After the SCP session is created successfully, ssh_scp_init() must be called to
initialize the SCP channel. The following code shows this:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

         if (ssh_scp_init(scp) != SSH_OK) {
             fprintf(stderr, "ssh_scp_init() failed.\n%s\n",
                     ssh_get_error(ssh));
             return 1;
         }


ssh_scp_pull_request()must be called to begin the file download. This function
returns SSH_SCP_REQUEST_NEWFILE to indicate that the remote host is going to begin
sending a new file. The following code shows this:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

         if (ssh_scp_pull_request(scp) != SSH_SCP_REQUEST_NEWFILE) {
             fprintf(stderr, "ssh_scp_pull_request() failed.\n%s\n",
                     ssh_get_error(ssh));
             return 1;
         }


libssh provides some methods we can use to retrieve the remote filename, file
size, and permissions. The following code retrieves these values and prints them
to the console:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

         int fsize = ssh_scp_request_get_size(scp);
         char *fname = strdup(ssh_scp_request_get_filename(scp));
         int fpermission = ssh_scp_request_get_permissions(scp);

         printf("Downloading file %s (%d bytes, permissions 0%o\n",
                 fname, fsize, fpermission);
         free(fname);


Once the file size is known, we can allocate space to store it in memory. This is
done using malloc() as shown in the following code:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

         char *buffer = malloc(fsize);
         if (!buffer) {
             fprintf(stderr, "malloc() failed.\n");
             return 1;
         }


Our program then accepts the new file request with ssh_scp_accept_request() and
downloads the file with ssh_scp_read(). The following code shows this:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

         ssh_scp_accept_request(scp);
         if (ssh_scp_read(scp, buffer, fsize) == SSH_ERROR) {
             fprintf(stderr, "ssh_scp_read() failed.\n%s\n",
                     ssh_get_error(ssh));
             return 1;
         }
The downloaded file can be printed to the screen with a simple call to printf().
When we're finished with the file data, it's important to free the allocated space
too. The following code prints out the file's contents and frees the allocated
memory:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

      printf("Received %s:\n", filename);
      printf("%.*s\n", fsize, buffer);
      free(buffer);


An additional call to ssh_scp_pull_request() should return SSH_SCP_REQUEST_EOF. This
indicates that we received the entire file from the remote host. The following
code checks for the end-of-file request from the remote host:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

      if (ssh_scp_pull_request(scp) != SSH_SCP_REQUEST_EOF) {
          fprintf(stderr, "ssh_scp_pull_request() unexpected.\n%s\n",
                  ssh_get_error(ssh));
          return 1;
      }


The preceding code is simplified a bit. The remote host could also return other
values which aren't necessarily errors. For example, if ssh_scp_pull_request()
returns SSH_SCP_REQUEST_WARNING, then the remote host has sent a warning. This
warning can be read by calling ssh_scp_request_get_warning(), but, in any case,
ssh_scp_pull_request() should be called again.


After the file is received, ssh_scp_close() and ssh_scp_free() should be used to free
resources as shown in the following code excerpt:
  /*ssh_download.c excerpt*/

      ssh_scp_close(scp);
      ssh_scp_free(scp);


After your program is done with the SSH session, don't forget to call
ssh_disconnect() and ssh_free() as well.


The entire file-downloading example is included with this chapter's code as
ssh_download.c.


You can compile ssh_download.c with the following command on Windows using
MinGW:
  gcc ssh_download.c -o ssh_download.exe -lssh


On Linux and macOS, the command to compile ssh_download.c is as follows:
  gcc ssh_download.c -o ssh_download -lssh


The following screenshot shows ssh_download.c being successfully compiled and
used on Linux to download a file:




As you can see from the preceding screenshot, downloading a file using SSH
and SCP is pretty straightforward. This can be a useful way to transfer data
between computers securely.
Summary
This chapter provided a cursory overview of the SSH protocol and how to use it
with libssh. We learned a lot about authentication with the SSH protocol, and
how the server and client must both authenticate for security. Once the
connection was established, we implemented a simple program to execute a
command on a remote host. We also saw how libssh makes downloading a file
using SCP very easy.

SSH provides a secure communication channel, which effectively denies
eavesdroppers the meaning of intercepted communication.

In the next chapter, Chapter 12, Network Monitoring and Security, we continue
with the security theme by looking at tools that can effectively eavesdrop on
non-secure communication channels.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge from this chapter:

 1. What is a significant downside of using Telnet?
 2. Which port does SSH typically run on?
 3. Why is it essential that the client authenticates the SSH server?
 4. How is the server typically authenticated?
 5. How is the SSH client typically authenticated?

The answers to this questions can be found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Further reading
For more information about Telnet, SSH, and libssh, please refer to the
following:

     The SSH library https://www.libssh.org
     RFC 15: Network Subsystem for Time Sharing Hosts (Telnet) (https://tools.
     ietf.org/html/rfc15)
     RFC 855: Telnet Option Specifications (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc855)
     RFC 4250: The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Assigned Numbers (https://to
     ols.ietf.org/html/rfc4250)
     RFC 4251: The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Architecture (https://tools.iet
     f.org/html/rfc4251)
     RFC 4252: The Secure Shell (SSH) Authentication Protocol (https://tools.i
     etf.org/html/rfc4252)
     RFC 4253: The Secure Shell (SSH) Transport Layer Protocol (https://tools
     .ietf.org/html/rfc4253)
     RFC 4254: The Secure Shell (SSH) Connection Protocol (https://tools.ietf
     .org/html/rfc4254)
     RFC 4255: Using DNS to Securely Publish Secure Shell (SSH) Key
     Fingerprints (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4255)
     RFC 4256: Generic Message Exchange Authentication for the Secure Shell
     Protocol (SSH) (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4256)
Section 4 - Odds and Ends
In this final section, we will study network testing and review common mistakes
to watch out for in socket application programming. We will end with an
exploration of the design considerations for Internet of Things connected
devices.

The following chapters are in this section:

         , Network Monitoring and Security
Chapter 12


         , Socket Programming Tips and Pitfalls
Chapter 13


         , Web Programming for the Internet of Things
Chapter 14
Network Monitoring and Security
In this chapter, we will look at common tools and techniques for network
monitoring. These techniques can be useful to both alert us to developing
problems, and to help troubleshoot existing problems. Network monitoring can
be important from a network security standpoint, where it may be useful to
detect, log, or even prevent network intrusions.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     Checking host reachability
     Displaying a connection route
     Showing open ports
     Listing open connections
     Packet sniffing
     Firewalls and packet filtering
Technical requirements
This chapter contains no C code. Instead, it focuses on useful tools and utilities.

The utilities and tools used in this chapter are either built in to your operating
system or are available as free, open source software. We'll provide instructions
for each tool as it is introduced.
The purpose of network monitoring
Network monitoring is a common IT term that has a broad implication. Network
monitoring can refer to the practice, techniques, and tools used to provide insight
into the status of a network. These techniques are used to monitor the availability
and performance of networked systems and troubleshoot problems.

Some reasons you may want to practice network monitoring include the
following:

     To detect the reachability of networked systems
     To measure the availability of networked systems
     To determine the performance of networked systems
     To inform decisions about network resource allocation
     To aid in troubleshooting
     To benchmark performance
     To reverse engineer a protocol
     To debug a program

In this chapter, we look at a small subset of conventional network monitoring
techniques that may be useful when implementing networked programs.

When developing or deploying networked programs, it is often the case that you
run into problems. When this happens, you are faced with two possibilities. The
first possibility is that your program could have a bug in it. The second
possibility is that your problem is caused by a network issue. The methods
covered in this chapter help to identify and troubleshoot network problems.

One of the most fundamental questions you could ask is, can this system reach
that system? The Ping utility, which is perhaps the most elementary network
tool, is designed to answer just that question. Let's consider its usage next.
Testing reachability
Perhaps the most basic network monitoring tool is Ping. Ping uses the Internet
Control Message Protocol (ICMP) to check whether a host is reachable. It also
commonly reports the total round-trip time (latency). Ping is available as a built-
in command or utility for all common operating systems.

The ICMP defines a set of special IP messages that are typically useful for
diagnostic and control purposes. Ping works by using two of these messages:
echo request and echo reply. The Ping utility sends an echo request ICMP
message to a destination host. When that host receives the echo request, it should
respond with an echo reply message.

When the echo reply is received, Ping knows that the destination host is
reachable. Ping can also report the round-trip time from when the echo request
was sent to when the echo reply was received. ICMP echo messages are usually
small and easy to process, so this round-trip time often serves as a best-case
estimate of network latency.

The Ping utility takes one argument: the hostname or address you're requesting a
response from. Ping on Unix-based systems will send packets continuously. On
Windows, pass in the -t flag for this behavior. Press Ctrl +C to stop.

The following screenshot shows using the Ping utility on example.com:
In the preceding screenshot, you can see that several ping messages were sent,
and each received a response. The round-trip time is reported for each ping
message, and a summary of all sent packets is also reported. The summary
includes the minimum, average, and maximum round-trip message time.

It is also possible to use ping to send larger messages. On Linux and macOS, the
-s flag specifies packet size. On Windows, the -l flag is used. It is sometimes
interesting to see how packet size affects latency and reliability.

The following screenshot shows pinging example.com with a larger 1,000-byte ping
message:
If ping fails to receive an echo reply, it does not necessarily mean that the target
host is unreachable. It only means that ping did not receive the expected reply.
This could be because the target machine ignored the echo request. However,
most systems are set up to respond to ping requests properly, and an echo
request timeout usually means the target system is unreachable.

Sometimes, just knowing that a host is reachable is enough, but sometimes you'll
want more information. It can be useful to know the exact path an IP packet
takes through the network. The traceroute utility provides this information.
Checking a route
Although we briefly introduced traceroute in Chapter 1, Introducing Networks and
Protocols, it is worth revisiting in more detail.

While Ping can tell us whether a network path exists between two systems,
traceroute can reveal what this path actually is.

Traceroute is used with one argument: the hostname or address you want to map
a route to.

On Windows, traceroute is called tracert. Tracert works in a very similar way to
the traceroute utility found on Linux and macOS.

The following screenshot shows the traceroute utility printing the routers used to
deliver data to example.com. The -n flag tells traceroute not to perform reverse-DNS
lookups for each hop. These lookups are rarely useful and omitting them saves a
bit of time and screen space:




The preceding screenshot shows that there are four or five routers (or hops)
between us and the destination system at example.com. Traceroute also shows the
round-trip time to each intermediate router.

Traceroute sends three messages to each router. This often exposes multiple
network paths, and there is no guarantee that any two messages will take
precisely the same path.

In the preceding example, we see that the message must first pass through
23.92.28.3. From there, it goes to one of three different systems, which are listed.

The message continues until it reaches the destination at hop five or six,
depending on the exact path it takes through the network.

This illustrates an interesting point: you shouldn't assume that two consecutive
packets take the same network path.
How traceroute works
To understand how traceroute works, we must understand a detail of the
Internet Protocol (IP). Each IP packet header contains a field called Time to
Live (TTL). TTL is the maximum number of seconds that a packet should live
on the network before being discarded. This is important to keep an IP packet
from simply persisting (which is, going in an endless loop) over the network.

TTL time intervals under one second are rounded up. This means that, in
practice, each router that handles an IP packet decrements the TTL field by 1.
Therefore, TTL is often used as a hop-count. That is to say that the TTL field
simply represents the number of hops a packet can still take over the network.

The traceroute utility uses TTL to identify intermediate routers in a network.
Traceroute begins by addressing a message (for example, a UDP datagram or an
ICMP echo request) to the destination host. However, traceroute sets the TTL
field to a value of 1. When the very first router in the connection path receives
this message, it decrements TTL to zero. The router then realizes that the
message has expired and discards it. A well-behaved router then sends an ICMP
Time Exceeded message back to the original sender. Traceroute uses this Time
Exceeded message to identify the first router in the connection.

Traceroute repeats this same process with additional messages. The second
message is sent using a TTL of 2, and that message identifies the second hop in
the network path. The third message is sent using a TTL of 3, and so on.
Eventually, the message reaches its final destination and traceroute has mapped
the entire network path.

The following diagram illustrates the method used by traceroute:
In the preceding diagram, the first message is sent with a TTL of 1. Router 1
doesn't forward this message, but instead returns an ICMP Time Exceeded
message. The second message is sent with a TTL of 2. It makes it to the second
router before timing out. The third message makes it to the destination, which
replies with an Echo Reply message. (If this traceroute were UDP-based, it
would expect to receive an ICMP Port Unreachable message instead.)

Not all routers return an ICMP Time Exceeded message, and some networks
filter out these messages. In these cases, traceroute will have no way to know
these routers' addresses. Traceroute prints an asterisk instead. Theoretically, if a
router exists in the connection path that doesn't decrement the TTL field, then
traceroute has no way of knowing that this router exists.

Now that we've covered the way ping and traceroute work, you may be
wondering how they could be implemented in C code. Unfortunately, despite
their simple algorithms, this is easier said than done. Keep reading to learn more.
Raw sockets
You may be interested in implementing your own network testing tools. The
ping tool seems pretty simple, and it is. Unfortunately, the socket programming
APIs we've been working with do not provide access at the IP level that the
ICMP is built on.

The socket programming API does provide access to raw sockets, in theory.
With raw sockets, a C program can construct the exact IP packet to send. That is,
a C programmer could construct an ICMP packet from scratch and send it over
the network. Raw sockets also allow for programs to receive uninterpreted
packets from the network directly. In this case, the user program would be
responsible for deconstructing and interpreting the ICMP packet, not the
operating system.

On systems with raw socket support, getting started can be as simple as changing
your socket() function invocation to the following:
  socket(AF_INET, SOCK_RAW, IPPROTO_RAW);


However, the problem is that raw sockets aren't universally supported. It is a
difficult subject to approach in a cross-platform way. Windows, in particular, has
varying support for raw sockets depending on the OS version. Recent versions of
Windows have virtually no support for raw sockets. For this reason, we won't
cover raw sockets in any more detail here.

Now that we've covered two basic tools for network troubleshooting, let's next
look at tools that inform us about our own system's relationship to the network.
Checking local connections
It is often useful to know what connections are being made on your local
machine. The netstat command can help with that. Netstat is available on Linux,
macOS, and Windows. Each version differs a little in the command-line options
and output, but the general usage principles are the same.

I recommend running netstat with the -n flag. This flag prevents netstat from
doing reverse-DNS lookups on each address and has the effect of speeding it up
significantly.

On Linux, we can use the following command to show open TCP connections:
  netstat -nt


The following screenshot shows the result of running this command on Linux:




In the preceding screenshot, you can see that netstat shows six columns. These
columns display the protocol, the sending and receiving queue, the local address,
the foreign address, and the connection state. In this example, we see that there
are three connections to port 80. It is likely that this computer is loading up three
web pages (as HTTP uses port 80).

On Windows, the netstat -n -p TCP command shows the same information, except
it omits the socket queue information.
The queue information, displayed on Unix-based systems, represents how many
bytes the kernel has queued up waiting for the program to read, or the number of
bytes sent but not acknowledged by the foreign host. Small numbers are healthy,
but if these numbers became large, it could indicate a problem with the network
or a bug in the program.

It is also useful to see which program is responsible for each connection. Use the
-p flag on Unix-based systems for this. On Windows, the -o flag shows PID and

the -b flag shows executable names.

If you're working on a server, it is often useful to see which listening sockets are
open. The -l flag instructs Unix-based netstat to show only listening sockets. The
following screenshot shows listening TCP server sockets, including the program
name:




In the preceding screenshot, we can see that this system is running a DNS
resolver (systemd-resolve on port 53, IPv4 only), an SSH daemon (sshd on port 22), a
printer service (cupsd on port 631), and a web server (apache2 on port 80, IPv6 only).

On Windows, netstat doesn't have an easy way to display only listening sockets.
Instead, you can use the -a flag to display everything. Filtering out only listening
TCP sockets can be accomplished with the following command:
  netstat -nao -p TCP | findstr LISTEN


The following screenshot shows using netstat on Windows to show only listening
TCP sockets:
With an idea of what programs are communicating from our machine, it may
also be useful to see what they are communicating. Tools such as tcpdump and
tshark specialize in this, and we will cover them next.
Snooping on connections
In addition to seeing which sockets are open on our computer, we can also
capture the exact data being sent and received.

We have a few tooling options for this:

     tcpdump is a commonly used program for packet capture on Unix-based
     systems. It is not available on modern Windows systems, however.
     Wireshark is a very popular network protocol analyzer that includes a very
     nice GUI. Wireshark is free software, released under the GNU GPL license,
     and available on many platforms (including Windows, Linux, and macOS).

Included with Wireshark is Tshark, a command-line-based tool that allows us to
dump and analyze network traffic. Programmers often prefer command-line
tools for their simple interfaces and ease of scripting. They have the additional
benefit on being usable on systems where GUIs may not be available. For these
reasons, we focus on using Tshark in this section.

Tshark can be obtained from https://www.wireshark.org.

If you're running Linux, it is likely that your distro provides a package for
Tshark. For example, on Ubuntu Linux, the following commands will install
Tshark:
  sudo apt-get update
  sudo apt-get install tshark


Once installed, Tshark is very easy to use.

You first need to decide which network interface(s) you want to use to capture
traffic. The desired interface or interfaces are passed to tshark with the -i flag. On
Linux, you can listen to all interfaces by passing -i any. However, Windows
doesn't provide the any interface. To listen on multiple interfaces with Windows,
you need to enumerate them separately, for example, -i 1 -i 2 -i 3.

Tshark lists the available interfaces with the -D flag. The following screenshot
shows Tshark on Windows enumerating the available network interfaces:




If you want to monitor local traffic (that is., where the communication is
between two programs on the same computer), you will want to use the Loopback
adapter.

Once you've identified the network interface you would like to monitor, you can
start Tshark with the -i flag and begin capturing traffic. Use Ctrl + C to stop
capturing. The following screenshot shows Tshark in use:
The preceding screenshot represents only a few seconds of running Tshark on a
typical Windows desktop. As you can see, there is a lot of traffic into and out of
an even relatively idle system.

To cut down on the noise, we need to use a capture filter. Tshark implements a
small language that allows easy specification of which packets to capture and
which to ignore.

Explaining filters may be easiest by way of example.

For example, if we want to capture only traffic to or from the IP address 8.8.8.8,
we will use the host 8.8.8.8 filter.

In the following screenshot, we've run Tshark with the host 8.8.8.8 filter:
You can see that while Tshark was running, it captured two packets. The first
packet is a DNS request sent to 8.8.8.8. Tshark informs us that this DNS request
is for the A record of example.com. The second packet is the DNS response
received from 8.8.8.8. Tshark shows that the DNS query response indicators that
the A record for example.com is 93.184.216.34.

Tshark filters also support the Boolean operators and, or, and not. For example, to
capture only traffic involving the IP addresses 8.8.8.8 and 8.8.4.4 you can use the
host 8.8.8.8 filter or the host 8.8.4.4 filter.


Filtering by port number is also very useful and can be done with port. For
example, the following screenshot shows Tshark being used to capture traffic to
93.184.216.34 on port 80:
In the preceding screenshot, we see that Tshark was run with the tshark -i 5 host
93.184.216.34 and port 80 command. This has the effect of capturing all traffic on
network interface 5 that is to or from 93.184.216.34 port 80.

TCP connections are sent as a series of packets. Although Tshark reports
capturing 11 packets, these are all associated with only one TCP connection.

So far, we've been using Tshark in a way that causes it to display a summary of
each packet. Often this is enough, but sometimes you will want to be able to see
the entire contents of a packet.
Deep packet inspection
If we pass tshark the -x flag, it displays an ASCII and hex dump of every packet
captured. The following screenshot shows this usage:




In the preceding screenshot, you can see that entire IP packets are being dumped.
In this case, we see the first three packets represent a new TCP connection's
three-way handshake. The fourth packet contains an HTTP request.

This direct insight into each packet's contents isn't always convenient. It's often
more practical to capture packets to a file and do the analysis later. The -w option
is used with tshark to capture packets to a file. You may also want to use the -c
option to limit the number of packets captured. This simple precaution protects
against accidentally filling your entire hard drive with network traffic.

The following screenshot shows using Tshark to capture 50 packets to a file
named capture.pcap:




Once the traffic is written to a file, we can use Tshark to analyze it at our leisure.
Simply run tshark -r capture.pcap to get started. For text-based protocols (such as
HTTP or SMTP), it is also often useful to open the capture file in a text editor for
analysis.

The ultimate way to analyze captured traffic is with Wireshark. Wireshark
allows you to load a capture file produced with tshark or tcpdump and analyze it with
a very nice GUI. Wireshark is also able to understand many standard protocols.

The following screenshot shows using Wireshark to display the traffic captured
from Tshark:
If the system you need to capture traffic on has a GUI, you can also use
Wireshark to capture your traffic directly.

If you play around with tshark and Wireshark, you will quickly see that it is easy
to inspect network protocols at a deep level. You may even find some
questionable security choices made by software running on your own system.

Although we've been focusing on monitoring only network traffic on our local
system, it is also possible to monitor all local network traffic.
Capturing all network traffic
     is only able to see traffic that arrives on your machine. This usually means
tshark

you can only use it to monitor traffic from applications on your computer.

To capture all internet traffic on your network, you must somehow arrange for
that traffic to arrive at your system, even though it usually wouldn't. There are
two basic methods to do this.

The first method is by using a router that supports mirroring. This feature makes
it mirror all traffic to a given Ethernet port. If you are using such a router, you
can configure it to mirror all network traffic to a particular port, and then plug
your computer into that port. From that point, any traffic capturing tool, such as
tcpdump or tshark, can be used to record this traffic.


The second way to sniff all internet traffic is to install a hub (or a switch with
port mirroring) between your router and internet modem. Hubs work by
mirroring all traffic to all ports. Hubs used to be a common way to build a
network. However, they have mostly been replaced by more efficient switches.

With a hub installed between your router and Internet modem, you can then
connect your system directly to this hub. With that setup, you can receive all the
internet traffic into or out of the network.

To monitor all network traffic (such as, even traffic between devices on the same
network), you need to build your network with either a hub or a switch that
supports port mirroring.

It should also be noted, that with the right modem, you can potentially capture
all Wi-Fi traffic wirelessly.

From a security perspective, let this be instructive. You should never consider
any network traffic to be secret. Only traffic which is secured appropriately
using encryption is resistant to monitoring.

Now that we've shown several tools and techniques for testing and monitoring
network traffic, let's consider the important topic of network security next.
Network security
Network security encompasses the tools, techniques, and practices to protect a
network from threats. These tools include both hardware and software and can
protect against a variety of threats.

Although the topic is too broad for much detail here, we will cover a few topics
that you are likely to encounter.

Firewalls are one of the most common network security techniques. Firewalls
act as a barrier between one network and another. As commonly used, they
monitor network traffic and allow or block traffic based on a defined set of rules.

Firewalls come in two types: software and hardware. Most operating systems
provide software firewalls now. Software firewalls are typically configured to
deny incoming connections unless a rule is set up to allow it explicitly.

It is also possible to configure software firewalls to deny outgoing traffic by
default. In this case, programs aren't allowed to establish new connections unless
a specific rule is added to the firewall configuration first.

Do be careful about assuming that firewalls catch all traffic. For example, the
Windows 10 firewall can be configured to deny all outgoing traffic by default,
but it still lets DNS requests through. An attacker could take advantage of this by
using DNS requests to exfiltrate data even though the user thinks that they are
protected via the Windows firewall.

Hardware firewalls come with various capabilities. Often, they are configured to
block any incoming connections that don't match predefined rules. On networks
without firewalls, routers often implicitly serve this same purpose. If your router
provides network address translation, then it wouldn't even know what to do
with an incoming connection unless a port forwarding rule has been pre-
established for it.

Although it is important to understand the basics of network security on a wide
level, as C programmers, we are often more concerned with the security of our
own programs. Security is not something that the C language makes easy, so let's
consider application-level security in more detail now.
Application security and safety
When programming in C, special consideration must be given to security. This is
because C is a low-level programming language that gives direct access to
system resources. Memory management, for example, must be done manually in
C, and a mistake in memory management could allow a network attacker to
write and execute arbitrary code.

With C, it is vital to ensure that allocated memory buffers aren't written past the
end. That is, whenever you copy data from the network into memory, you must
ensure that enough memory was allocated to store the data. If your program
misses this even once, it potentially allows a window for an attacker to gain
control of your program.

Memory management, from a security perspective, isn't a concern with many
higher-level programming languages. In many programming languages, it isn't
even possible to write outside of allocated memory. Of course, these languages
also can't provide the precise control of memory layout and data structures that C
programmers enjoy.

Even if you are careful to manage memory perfectly, there are still many more
security gotchas to be on the lookout for. When implementing any network
protocol, you should never assume that the data your program receives will
adhere to the protocol specification. If your program does make these
assumptions, it will be open to attack by a rogue program that doesn't. These
protocol bugs are a concern in any programming language, not just C. Again,
though, the thing about C is that these protocol implementation errors can
quickly lead to memory errors, and memory errors quickly become serious.

If you're implementing a C program intended to run as a server, you should
employ a defense in depth approach. That is, you should set up your program in
such a manner that multiple defenses must be overcome before an attacker could
cause damage.

The first layer of defense is writing your program without bugs. Whenever
dealing with received network data, carefully consider what would happen if the
received data was not at all what you're expecting. Make sure your program does
the appropriate thing.

Also, don't run your program with any more privileges than needed for its
functionality. If your program doesn't need access to a sensitive set of files, make
sure your operating system doesn't allow it to access those files. Never run server
software as root.

If you're implementing an HTTP or HTTPS server, consider not connecting your
program directly to the internet. Instead, use a reverse proxy server as the first
point of contact to the internet, and have your software interface only with the
proxy server. This provides an additional layer of isolation against attacks.

Finally, consider not writing networked code in C at all, if you can find an
alternative. Many C servers can be rewritten as CGI programs that don't directly
interact with the network at all. TCP or UDP servers can often be rewritten to
use inetd, and thus avoid the socket programming interface altogether. If your
program needs to load web pages, consider using a well-tested library, such as
libcurl, for that purpose instead of rolling your own.


We've covered a few network testing techniques so far. When deploying these
techniques on live networks, it is important to be considerate. Let's finish with a
note on etiquette.
Network-testing etiquette
When network testing, it is always important to behave responsibly and ethically.
Generally speaking, don't test someone else's network without their explicit
permission. Doing otherwise could cause embarrassment at best, and land you in
serious legal trouble at worst.

You should also be aware that some network testing techniques can set off
alarms. For example, many network administrators monitor their network's load
and performance characteristics. If you decide to load-test these networks
without notice, you might set off automated alarms causing inconvenience.

Some other testing techniques can look like attacks. Port scanning, for example,
is a useful technique where a tester tries establishing many connections on
different ports. It's used to discover which ports on a system are open. However,
it is a common technique used by malicious attackers to find weaknesses. Some
system administrators consider port scans to be an attack, and you should never
port scan a system without permission.
Summary
In this chapter, we covered a lot of ground over the broad topics of network
monitoring and security. We looked at tools useful for testing the reachability of
networked devices. We learned how to trace a path through the network, and
how to monitor connections made on our local machine. We also discovered how
to log and inspect network traffic.

We discussed network security and how it may impact the C developer. By
showing how network traffic can be directly inspected, we learned first-hand the
importance of encryption for communication privacy. The importance of security
at the application level was also discussed.

In the next chapter, we take a closer look at how our coding practices affect
program behavior. We also discuss many essential odds and ends for writing
robust network applications in C.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge from this chapter:

 1. Which tool would you use to test the reachability of a target system?
 2. Which tool lists the routers to a destination system?
 3. What are raw sockets used for?
 4. Which tools list the open TCP sockets on your system?
 5. What is one of the biggest concerns with security for networked C
    programs?

The answers to these questions can be found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Further reading
For more information about the topics covered in this chapter, please refer to the
following:

     RFC 792: Internet Control Message Protocol (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7
     92)
     Wireshark (https://www.wireshark.org)
Socket Programming Tips and
Pitfalls
This chapter builds on all the knowledge you've obtained throughout this book.

Socket programming can be complicated. There are many pitfalls to avoid and
subtle programming techniques to implement. In this chapter, we consider some
nuanced details of network programming that are essential for writing robust
programs.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     Error handling and error descriptions
     TCP handshakes and orderly release
     Timeout on connect()
     Preventing TCP deadlocks
     TCP flow control
     Avoiding address-in-use errors
     Preventing SIGPIPE crashes
     Multiplexing limitations of select()
Technical requirements
Any modern C compiler can compile the example programs from this chapter.
We recommend MinGW on Windows and GCC on Linux and macOS. See Appen
dix B, Setting Up Your C Compiler On Windows, Appendix C, Setting Up Your C

Compiler On Linux, and Appendix D, Setting Up Your C Compiler On macOS, for
compiler setup.

The code for this book can be found at: https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-P
rogramming-with-C.


From the command line, you can download the code for this chapter with the
following command:
  git clone https://github.com/codeplea/Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C
  cd Hands-On-Network-Programming-with-C/chap13


Each example program in this chapter runs on Windows, Linux, and macOS.
When compiling on Windows, each example program will require linking to the
Winsock library. This can be accomplished by passing the -lws2_32 option to gcc.

All of the example programs in this chapter require the same header files and C
macros that we developed in Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs. For
brevity, we put these statements in a separate header file, chap13.h. For an
explanation of these statements, please refer to Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with
Socket APIs.

The first part of chap13.h includes the needed networking headers for each
platform. The code for that is as follows:
  /*chap13.h*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #ifndef _WIN32_WINNT
  #define _WIN32_WINNT 0x0600
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>
  #include <ws2tcpip.h>
  #pragma comment(lib, "ws2_32.lib")

  #else
  #include <sys/types.h>
  #include <sys/socket.h>
  #include <netinet/in.h>
  #include <arpa/inet.h>
  #include <netdb.h>
  #include <unistd.h>
  #include <errno.h>
  #include <fcntl.h>

  #endif


We also define some macros to make writing portable code easier, and we
include the additional headers that our programs need:
  /*chap13.h continued*/

  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) != INVALID_SOCKET)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) closesocket(s)
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())

  #else
  #define ISVALIDSOCKET(s) ((s) >= 0)
  #define CLOSESOCKET(s) close(s)
  #define SOCKET int
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
  #endif


  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <string.h>


That concludes chap13.h.
Error handling
Error handling can be a problematic topic in C as it does not "hold the
programmer's hand". Any memory or resources allocated must be manually
released, and this can be tricky to get exactly right in every situation.

When a networked program encounters an error or unexpected situation, the
normal program flow is interrupted. This is made doubly difficult when
designing a multiplexed system that handles many connections concurrently.

The example programs in the book take a shortcut to error handling. Almost all
of them simply terminate after an error is detected. While this is sometimes a
valid strategy in real-world programs, real-world programs usually need more
complicated error recovery.

Sometimes, you can get away with merely having your client program terminate
after encountering an error. This behavior is often the correct response for simple
command-line utilities. At other times, you may need to have your program
automatically try again.

Event-driven programming can provide the technique needed to simplify this
logic a bit. Mainly, your program is structured so that a data structure is allocated
to store information about each connection. Your program uses a main loop that
checks for events, such as a readable or writable socket, and then handles those
events. When structuring your program in this way, it is often easier to flag a
connection as needing an action, rather than calling a function to process that
action immediately.

With careful design, errors can be handled as a simple matter of course, instead
of as exceptions to the normal program flow.

Ultimately, error handling is a very specialized process, and careful care needs to
be taken to consider application requirements. What's appropriate for one system
is not necessarily correct for another.

In any case, a robust program design dictates that you carefully consider how to
handle errors. Many programmers focus only on the happy path. That is, they
take care to design the program flow based on the assumption that everything
goes correctly. For robust programs, this is a mistake. It is equally important to
consider the program flow in cases where everything goes wrong.

Throughout the rest of this chapter, we touch on places where network
programming can go wrong. Network programming can be subtle, and many of
these failure modes are surprising. However, with proper consideration, they are
all capable of being handled.

Before diving into all the weird ways a connection can fail, let's first focus on
making error logging a bit easier. In this book, so far, we've been dealing with
numeric error codes. It is often more useful to obtain a text description of an
error. We look at a method for this next.
Obtaining error descriptions
In Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket APIs, we developed the GETSOCKETERRNO()
macro as a cross-platform way to obtain the error code after a failed system call.

The GETSOCKETERRNO() macro is repeated here for your convenience:
  #if defined(_WIN32)
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (WSAGetLastError())
  #else
  #define GETSOCKETERRNO() (errno)
  #endif


The preceding code has served us well throughout this book. It has the advantage
of being short and simple.

In a real-world program, you may want to display a text-based error message in
addition to the error code. Windows and Unix-based systems both provide
functions for this purpose.

We can build a simple function to return the last error message as a C string. The
code for this function is the following:
  /*error_text.c excerpt*/

  const char *get_error_text() {

  #if defined(_WIN32)

      static char message[256] = {0};
      FormatMessage(
          FORMAT_MESSAGE_FROM_SYSTEM|FORMAT_MESSAGE_IGNORE_INSERTS,
          0, WSAGetLastError(), 0, message, 256, 0);
      char *nl = strrchr(message, '\n');
      if (nl) *nl = 0;
      return message;

  #else
      return strerror(errno);
  #endif

  }


The preceding function formats the error as text using FormatMessage() on Windows
and strerror() on other operating systems.
Unix-based systems provide the strerror() function. This function takes the error
code as its only parameter, and it returns a pointer to an error message string.

Getting an error code description on Windows is a bit more involved. We use the
FormatMessage() function to obtain the text description. This function has many

options, but the parameters used in the preceding code snippet work well for our
purposes. Note that Windows error descriptions are generally returned ending
with a newline. Our function uses strrchr() to find the last line-feed character and
truncate the description at that point.

This chapter's code includes a program called error_text.c that demonstrates this
method. This program calls the socket() function with invalid parameters, and
then uses get_error_text() to display the error message:
  /*error_text.c excerpt*/

      printf("Calling socket() with invalid parameters.\n");
      socket(0, 0, 0);
      printf("Last error was: %s\n", get_error_text());


Note that error codes and descriptions vary greatly between operating systems.
The next two screenshots show the error message displayed by this program on
both Windows and Linux.

The following screenshot shows error_text running on Windows:




The next screenshot shows error_text running on an Ubuntu Linux desktop:
As you can see from the preceding two screenshots, different operating systems
don't often report errors in the same way.

Now that we have a better way to investigate errors, let's move on to consider
some ways that TCP sockets can fail.
TCP socket tips
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is a fantastic protocol, and TCP
sockets provide a beautiful abstraction. They present discrete packets on an
unreliable network as a reliable, continuous stream of data. To the programmer,
sending and receiving data from a peer anywhere in the world is made nearly as
easy as reading and writing to a file.

TCP works very well to hide network shortcomings. When a flaky network
drops a few packets, TCP faithfully sorts out the mess and retransmits as needed.
The application using TCP receives the data in perfect order. The application
doesn't even know there was a network problem, and it certainly doesn't need to
address the problem.

With this abstraction, like all abstractions, comes some inherent risk. TCP tries
very hard to make networks look reliable. It usually succeeds, but sometimes,
abstractions leak. What happens if your network cable is cut? What happens if
the application you are connected to crashes? TCP isn't magic. It can't fix these
problems.

Of course, it's evident that the abstraction must break when faced with severe
problems such as a total network outage. However, sometimes, more subtle
problems can arise from details thought to be abstracted away. For example,
what happens when you try to send a lot of data, but the peer that you are
connected to isn't reading it? (Answer: the data gets backed up.)

In this section, we look at TCP in a little more detail. We're especially interested
in the behavior of TCP sockets in these edge cases.

A TCP connection lifespan can be divided into three distinct phases. They are as
follows:

     The setup phase
     The data-transfer phase
     The tear-down phase
Problems can arise in each step.

In the setup phase, we have to consider what happens if the target system doesn't
respond. By default, connect() sometimes waits a long time, attempting to
establish a TCP connection. Sometimes, that is what you want, but often it isn't.

For the data-transfer phase, we must be careful to prevent deadlocks. An
awareness of TCP congestion control mechanisms can also help us to prevent
degenerate cases where our connection becomes slow or uses a lot more
bandwidth than necessary.

Finally, knowing the details of the tear-down phase helps us to ensure that we
haven't lost data at the end of a connection. Details of how sockets are
terminated can also cause operating systems to hold on to half-dead connections
long after they've disconnected. These lingering sockets can prevent new
programs from binding to their local ports.

Let's begin with some information about the three-way handshake that
establishes TCP connections and how to timeout a connect() call.
Timeout on connect()
Usually, when we call connect() on a TCP socket, connect() blocks until the
connection is established.

The following diagram illustrates the TCP three-way handshake that establishes
a typical TCP connection and how it relates to a standard, blocking connect() call:




The standard TCP three-way handshake consists of three parts. First, the Client
sends a Synchronize (SYN) message to the Server. Then the Server responds
with an SYN Message of its own, combined with an Acknowledged (ACK)
message of the Client's SYN Message. The Client then responds with an
acknowledgment of the Server's SYN Message. The connection is then open
and ready for data transmission.
When the connect() function is called on the Client side, the first SYN Message
is sent, and the connect() function blocks until the SYN+ACK Message is
received from the Server. After the SYN+ACK Message is received, connect()
enqueues the final ACK Message and returns.

This means that connect() blocks for at least one round-trip network time. That is,
it blocks from the time that its SYN Message is sent to the time that the
SYN+ACK Message is received. While one round-trip network time is the best-
case scenario, in the worst case, it could block for much longer. Consider what
happens when an overloaded Server receives an SYN Message. The Server
could take some time to reply with the SYN+ACK Message.

If connect() cannot establish a connection successfully (that is, SYN+ACK
Message is never received), then the connect() call eventually times out. This
timeout period is controlled by the operating system. The exact timeout period
varies, but 20 seconds is about typical.

There is no standard way to extend the timeout period of connect(), but you can
always call connect() again if you want to keep trying.

There are a few ways to make connect() timeout early. One way is to use multiple
processes and kill the child process if it doesn't connect in time. Another way is
to use SIGALARM in Unix-based systems.

A cross-platform connect() timeout can be achieved by using select(). Recall from
Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of TCP Connections, that select() allows us to
wait on a socket operation with a specified timeout.

select()also has the additional benefit of allowing your program to do useful
work while waiting for the TCP connection to be established. That is, select()
can be used to wait on multiple connect() calls, and other socket events besides. It
can work well for a client that needs to connect to several servers in parallel.

Using select() to timeout a connect() call involves a few steps. They are as
follows:

 1. Set the socket to non-blocking operation. This is done using fcntl(O_NONBLOCK)
    on Unix-based systems and ioctlsocket(FIONBIO) on Windows.
 2. Call connect(). This call returns immediately, provided that step 1 was
    successful.
 3. Check the return code from connect(). A return value of zero indicates that
    the connection was successful, which probably indicates that non-blocking
    mode was set incorrectly. A non-zero return value from connect() means we
    should check the error code (that is, WSAGetLastError() on Windows and errno
    on other platforms). An error code of EINPROGRESS (WSAEWOULDBLOCK on Windows)
    indicates that the TCP connection is in progress. Any other value indicates
    an actual error.
 4. Set up and call select() with the desired timeout.
 5. Set the socket back to blocking mode.
 6. Check to see whether the socket connected successfully.

Step 1, setting the socket to non-blocking mode, can be accomplished with the
following code:
  #if defined(_WIN32)
      unsigned long nonblock = 1;
      ioctlsocket(socket_peer, FIONBIO, &nonblock);
  #else
      int flags;
      flags = fcntl(socket_peer, F_GETFL, 0);
      fcntl(socket_peer, F_SETFL, flags | O_NONBLOCK);
  #endif


The preceding code works a bit differently depending on whether it is running on
Windows. On Windows, the ioctlsocket() function is used with the FIONBIO flag to
indicate non-blocking socket operation. On non-Windows systems, the fcntl()
function is used to set the O_NONBLOCK flag for the same purpose.

In step 2 and step 3, the call to connect() is done normally. The only difference is
that you should expect an error code of EINPROGRESS on Unix-based systems and
WSAEWOULDBLOCK on Windows.


In step 4, the setup for select() is straightforward. The select() function is used in
the same way as described in previous chapters. For your convenience, the
following code shows one way to use select() for this purpose:
  fd_set set;
  FD_ZERO(&set);
  FD_SET(socket_peer, &set);

  struct timeval timeout;
  timeout.tv_sec = 5; timeout.tv_usec = 0;
  select(socket_peer+1, 0, &set, 0, &timeout);
Notice in the preceding code that we set a timeout of five seconds. Therefore,
this select() call returns after either the connection is established, the connection
has an error, or 5 seconds have elapsed.

In step 5, setting the socket back to non-blocking mode is accomplished with the
following code:
  #if defined(_WIN32)
      nonblock = 0;
      ioctlsocket(socket_peer, FIONBIO, &nonblock);
  #else
      fcntl(socket_peer, F_SETFL, flags);
  #endif


In step 6, we are looking to see whether the call to select() timed out, returned
early from an error, or returned early because our socket has successfully
connected.

Surprisingly, there is no easy, robust, cross-platform way to check whether the
socket is connected at this point. My advice is to simply assume that any socket
marked by select() as writable has connected successfully. Just try to use the
socket. Most TCP client programs will want to call send() after connecting,
anyway. The return value from this first send() call indicates whether you have a
problem.

If you really do want to try and determine the socket state without resorting to
send(), you should be aware of some differences in how select() signals in this

situation. On Unix-based systems, select() signals a socket as writable once the
connection is established. If an error has occurred, select() signals the socket as
both writable and readable. However, if the socket has connected successfully
and data has arrived from the remote peer, this also produces both the readable
and writable situation. In that case, the getsockopt() function can be used to
determine whether an error has occurred. On Windows, select() marks a socket
as excepted if an error occurred.

Please refer to connect_timeout.c in this chapter's code repository for a working
example of the connect() timeout method using select(). An additional
example, connect_blocking.c, is also included for comparison.

Once a new connection is established, our concern moves to preventing data-
transfer problems. In the worst case, our program could get deadlocked with its
peer, preventing any data transfer. We'll consider this in more detail next.
TCP flow control and avoiding
deadlock
When designing application protocols and writing network code, we need to be
careful to prevent a deadlock state. A deadlock is when both sides on a
connection are waiting for the other side to do something. The worst-case
scenario is when both sides end up waiting indefinitely.

A trivial example of a deadlock is if both the client and server call recv()
immediately after the connection is established. In that case, both sides wait
forever for data that is never going to come.

A less obvious deadlock situation can happen if both parties try to send data at
the same time. Before we can consider this situation, we must first understand a
few more details of how TCP connections operate.

When data is sent over a TCP connection, this data is broken up into segments. A
few segments are sent immediately, but additional segments aren't sent over the
network until the first few segments are acknowledged as being received by the
connected peer. This is part of TCP's flow-control scheme, and it helps to
prevent a sender from transmitting data faster than a receiver can handle.

Consider the following diagram:
In the preceding diagram, the Client sends three TCP segments of data to the
Server. The Client has additional DATA ready to send, but it must wait until the
already-sent data is acknowledged. Once the ACK Message is received, the
Client resumes sending its remaining DATA.

This is the TCP flow-control mechanism that ensures that the sender isn't
transmitting faster than the receiver can handle.

Now, keeping in mind that a TCP socket can send only a limited amount of
data before requiring acknowledgment of receipt, imagine what happens if both
parties to a TCP connection try to send a bunch of data at the same time. In this
case, both parties send the first few TCP segments. They both then wait until
their peer acknowledges receipt before sending more. However, if neither party
is reading data, then neither party acknowledges receiving data. This is a
deadlock state. Both parties are stuck waiting forever.

Many application protocols prevent this problem by design. These protocols
naturally alternate between sending and receiving data. For example, in HTTP,
the client sends a request, and then the server sends a reply. The server only
starts sending data after the client has finished sending.

However, TCP is a full-duplex protocol. Applications that do need to send data
in both directions simultaneously should take advantage of TCP's ability to do
so.

As a motivating example, imagine implementing a file-transfer program where
both peers to a TCP connection are sending large parts of a file at the same time.
How do we prevent the deadlock condition?

The solution to this is straightforward. Both sides should alternate calls to send()
with calls to recv(). The liberal use of select() will help us do this efficiently.

Recall that select() indicates which sockets are ready to be read from and which
sockets are ready to be written to. The send() function should be called only when
you know that a socket is ready to be written to. Otherwise, you risk that send()
may block. In the worst case, send() will block indefinitely.

Thus, one procedure to send a large amount of data is as follows:

 1. Call send() with your remaining data.
 2. The return value of send() indicates how many bytes were actually
    consumed by send(). If fewer bytes were sent than you intended, then your
    next call to send() should be used to transmit the remainder.
 3. Call select() with your socket in both the read and write sets.
 4. If select() indicates that the socket is ready to be read from, call recv() on it
    and handle the received data as needed.
 5. If select() indicates that the socket is ready to write to again, go to step 1
    and call send() with the remaining data to be sent.
The important point is that calls to send() are interspersed with calls to recv(). In
this way, we can be sure that no data is lost, and this deadlock condition does not
occur.

This method also neatly extends to applications with many open sockets. Each
socket is added to the select() call, and ready sockets are serviced as needed.
Your application will need to keep track of which data is remaining to be sent for
each connection.

It should also be noted that setting sockets to a non-blocking mode can simplify
your program's logic in some cases. Even with non-blocking sockets, select() can
still be used as a central blocking point to wait for socket events.

Two files are included with this chapter's code repository that can help to
demonstrate the deadlock state and how select() can be used to prevent it. The
first file, server_ignore.c, implements a simple TCP server that accepts
connections and then ignores them. The second file, big_send.c, initiates a TCP
connection and then attempts to send lots of data. By using the big_send program
to connect to the server_ignore program, you can investigate the blocking behavior
of send() for yourself.

Deadlocks represent only one way a TCP connection can unexpectedly fail.
While deadlocks can be very difficult to diagnose, they are preventable with
careful programming. Besides the risk for deadlock, TCP also presents other data
transfer pitfalls. Let's consider another common performance problem next.
Congestion control
As we've just seen, TCP implements flow control to prevent a sender from
overwhelming a receiver. This flow control works by allowing only a limited
number of TCP segments to be sent before requiring an acknowledgment of
receipt.

TCP also implements congestion control methods as part of a network
congestion-avoidance scheme. While flow control is vital to prevent
overwhelming the receiver, congestion control is essential to prevent
overwhelming the network.

One way TCP congestion control works is by allowing only a limited amount of
data to be sent before pausing to wait for an acknowledgment of receipt. This
data limit is decreased when network congestion is detected. In this way, TCP
doesn't try putting more data over the network than the network can handle.

Another way TCP implements congestion control is through the TCP slow start
algorithm. This method provides a way for TCP to ramp-up a connection to its
full potential, instead of immediately dumping a lot of data on the network all at
once.

It works like this—when a new TCP connection is established, only a minimal
amount of data is allowed to be sent unacknowledged. When this data is
acknowledged, the limit is increased. Each time a new acknowledgment is
received, the limit is increased further until packet loss happens or the limit
reaches the desired maximum.

The following diagram shows a TCP slow-start in action:
In the preceding diagram, you can see that the Client starts by sending only a
little data. Once that data is acknowledged, the Client is willing to send a larger
amount of data before requiring another acknowledgment. Once that
acknowledgment is received, the Client increases its limit again, and so on.

The slow-start algorithm can cause problems for short-lived connections. In
practice, if a connection needs to send only a small amount of data, that
connection won't ever reach its full potential. This has caused many protocols to
be designed around keeping connections open for longer. For example, it used to
be common for an HTTP connection to transmit only one resource. Now it is far
more common for an HTTP connection to be held open for additional resources,
one after another. This connection reuse avoids the overhead of the TCP three-
way handshake and slow start.
In addition to avoiding congestion, TCP also provides methods to increase
bandwidth efficiency.
The Nagle algorithm
One technique used by TCP increase efficiency is the Nagle algorithm. The
Nagle algorithm works to make the sender pool small amounts of data together
until it has enough to justify sending.

Consider sending just one byte of data over a TCP connection. Each TCP
segment uses 20 bytes to transmit TCP bookkeeping. An additional 20 bytes are
needed for the IPv4 header. So, this 1 byte of application data becomes 41 bytes
on the network. That's an overhead of 4,000%, and we are not even counting the
overhead from lower layers (for example, the Ethernet frame overhead) yet!

The Nagle algorithm states that only one small, unacknowledged TCP segment
may be outstanding at any given time. A small segment is considered any
segment less than the Maximum Segment Size (MSS).

Let's see how this applies to a program doing small writes. Consider the
following code called on a connected, but otherwise idle, TCP socket:
  send(my_socket, "a", 1, 0);
  send(my_socket, "b", 1, 0);


After the first send() call, the a data is packed into a TCP message and sent off,
along with its 40 bytes of TCP and IPv4 overhead.

The second send() call returns immediately, but the b data isn't actually sent
immediately. The Nagle algorithm causes the b data to be queued-up by the
operating system. It won't be sent until either the first TCP message is
acknowledged or send() is called again with enough additional data to fill up an
entire max-size TCP segment.

For both a and b to be received by the recipient, it will take the duration of one
round-trip network time, plus an additional one-way network time.

We can easily get this 1.5 round-trip network time down to 0.5 round-trip
network time by just using the following code:
  send(my_socket, "ab", 2, 0);
For this reason, you should always prefer doing one large write to send() instead
of many small ones, whenever possible. Doing one large write allows ab to be
sent in the same TCP message, thereby sidestepping the Nagle algorithm
altogether.

In some applications, you really do need to send a small packet followed by
another small packet immediately after. For example, in a real-time multiplayer
video game, you can't queue up player commands; they must be sent
continuously. In these cases, it makes sense to disable the Nagle algorithm for
reduced latency, at the expense of decreased bandwidth efficiency.

Disabling the Nagle algorithm can be done using the setsockopt() function. The
following code shows this method in action:
  int yes = 1;
  if (setsockopt(my_socket, IPPROTO_TCP, TCP_NODELAY,
          (void*)&yes, sizeof(yes)) < 0) {
      fprintf(stderr, "setsockopt() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
  }


Be sure to consider all your options before disabling Nagle. When faced with a
poorly performing network program, some programmers will disable the Nagle
algorithm as a first step. In reality, the decision to disable the Nagle algorithm
should be approached cautiously. Disabling the Nagle algorithm in real-time
applications often makes sense. Disabling it in other contexts rarely does.

For example, imagine that you've implemented an HTTP client. It seems a bit
sluggish, and so you try disabling the Nagle algorithm. You do that and find that
it runs much faster now. However, by disabling the Nagle algorithm, you've
increased network overhead. You could have gotten the same improvement by
simply pooling together your send() calls.

If you're implementing a real-time algorithm that does need to send small time-
critical packets, using TCP_NODELAY may still not be the right method for you. TCP
can introduce delays in many other ways. For example, if one TCP packet is lost
over the network, no further data can be delivered until that packet is
retransmitted. This can have the effect of delaying many packets because of one
hold-up.

Many real-time applications prefer using UDP over TCP. Each UDP packet is
entirely independent of any other packets sent before or after. Of course, the
trade-off is that there is a lesser guarantee of reliable delivery; messages may
arrive in a different order than they were set, and some messages may arrive
twice. Nonetheless, many applications can tolerate this. Real-time
video streaming, for example, can use UDP, where each packet stores a very
short, time-stamped part of the video. If a packet is lost, there is no need to
retransmit; the video stutters for a moment and resumes when the next packet
arrives. Packets received late, or out of order, are safely ignored.

Although the Nagle algorithm often works well to improve network utilization,
not understanding how it works can lead to problems. In addition to the Nagle
algorithm, TCP implements many other methods to limit the needless waste of
network resources. Sometimes, these other methods work poorly with one
another. The delayed ACK is one such method that can work badly with the
Nagle algorithm.
Delayed acknowledgment
We've seen that many client-server protocols work by having the client send a
request and then the server send a response. We've also seen that when a TCP
peer reads data off the network, it sends an acknowledgment to let the sender
know that the data was received successfully.

A typical client-server interchange might, therefore, look like the following:




In the preceding diagram, the Client first sends a request to the Server. The
Server reads this request, and a TCP ACK Message is sent back to the Client.
The Server then processes the request data and replies with its response.

Some TCP stacks implement a delayed acknowledgment method to reduce
network congestion. This technique works by delaying the acknowledgment of
received data. The hope is that the receiver is going to send a response very soon
anyway, and that the acknowledgment can piggyback on this response. When it
works, which is often, it conserves bandwidth.

If the receiver doesn't send a reply, the acknowledgment is sent after a short
delay; 200 milliseconds is typical.
If the server from before implements delayed acknowledgment, the client-server
interchange might look like the following:




This is when delayed acknowledgment works well.

Now, consider combining the Nagle algorithm with delayed acknowledgment. If
the client transmits its request in two small messages, then the sending channel is
blocked for not only the round-trip time. It is also blocked for the additional
acknowledgment delay time.

This is illustrated in the following diagram:
In the preceding diagram, we see that the Client sent the first part of its request
in a small packet. The Nagle algorithm prevents it from sending the second part
of its request until it receives an acknowledgment from the Server. Meanwhile,
the Server receives the request, but it delays acknowledgment in the hope that it
can piggyback the ACK Message on the reply. The Server processes the first
part of the request and sees that it doesn't have the full request yet, so it cannot
send a reply. After the delay period elapses, the Server does eventually send an
ACK Message. The Client receives this ACK Message and sends the rest of the
reply. The Server replies with its response.

In this degenerate case, the interaction of the Nagle algorithm and the delayed
acknowledgment technique cased the Client-Server interaction to take two full
round-trip network times plus the delayed acknowledgment time (which could
itself be many round-trip times).

Some programmers jump in these situations to disable the Nagle algorithm.
Sometimes that is needed, but often it is the wrong solution.
In our example, merely passing larger data buffers to send() completely solves the
degenerate interaction. Passing the entire request to send() in one call reduces the
transaction time from two round-trips plus delay to one round-trip and no delay.

My advice is to prefer calling send() with one large write instead of multiple
small writes, whenever possible. Of course, if you're implementing a real-time
application with TCP, then you can't pool send() calls. In that case, disabling the
Nagle algorithm can be the correct call.

For the sake of completeness, it should be noted that a delayed ACK can usually
be disabled. This is done by passing TCP_QUICKACK to setsockopt() on systems that
support it. Again, this is not usually needed.

Now that we've reviewed a few hidden problems that can crop up with active
TCP connections, it's time to move on to connection teardown.
Connection tear-down
The way a TCP connection transitions from an established connection to a closed
one is nuanced. Let's consider this in more detail.

TCP connections are full-duplex. This means that the data being sent is
independent of the data being received. Data is sent and received simultaneously.
This also implies that the connection must be closed by both sides before it is
truly disconnected.

To close a TCP connection, each side sends a Finish (FIN) message and receives
an ACK message from their peer.

The exact tear-down process, from the perspective of each peer, depends on
whether it sent a FIN first, or received a FIN first. There are three basic
connection tear-down cases. They are as follows:

 1. You initiate the tear-down by sending the first FIN message
 2. You receive a FIN message from your connected peer
 3. You and your peer send FIN messages simultaneously

In case 3, where both sides send a FIN message simultaneously, each side thinks
that it is in case 1. That is, each side thinks that it has sent the first FIN message,
and each side tears down its socket as in case 1. In practice, this is pretty rare,
but certainly possible.

When a TCP socket is open for full-duplex communication, it is said to be in the
ESTABLISHED state. The closing initiator sends a FIN message to its peer. The peer

replies with an ACK. At this point, the connection is only half closed. The
initiator can no longer send data, but it can still receive data. The peer has the
option to continue to send more data to the closing initiator. When the peer is
ready to finish closing the connection, it sends its own FIN message. The
initiator then responds with the final ACK message, and the connection is fully
closed.

The TCP connection state transitions on the initiator are ESTABLISHED, FIN-WAIT-1,
         ,         , and CLOSED. The TCP connection state transitions on the
FIN-WAIT-2 TIME-WAIT

receiving peer are ESTABLISHED, CLOSE-WAIT, LAST-ACK, and CLOSED.

The following diagram illustrations the normal TCP four-way closing
handshake:




It is sometimes possible for the Peer to combine its ACK Message and FIN
Message into one message. In that case, the connection can be torn down with
only three messages, instead of four.

In the case where both sides initiate the tear-down simultaneously, both sides
follow the state transition of the Initiator. The messages sent and received are
the same.

Networks are inherently unreliable, so there is a chance that the final ACK
Message sent by the Initiator will be lost. In this case, the Peer, having not
received an ACK Message, resends its FIN Message. If the Initiator had
completely CLOSED its socket after sending the final ACK Message, then it
would be impossible to reply to this resent FIN Message. For this reason, the
Initiator enters a TIME-WAIT state after sending the last ACK Message. During this
TIME-WAIT state, it responds to any retransmitted FIN Message from the Peer with

an ACK Message. After a delay, the Initiator leaves the TIME-WAIT state and fully
closes its socket.

The TIME-WAIT delay is usually on the order of one minute, but it could be
configured for much longer.

In this book, we've used only the close() function (closesocket() on Windows) to
disconnect a socket. This function, although simple to use, has the disadvantage
of always fully closing a socket. That is, no data can be sent or received on a
socket called with close(). The TCP teardown handshake does allow for data to
be received after a FIN message has been sent. Let's next consider how to do this
programmatically.
The shutdown() function
As we've just seen, TCP connections are torn down in two steps. The first one
side sends a FIN message, and then the other side does. However, each side is
allowed to continue to send data until it has sent its own FIN message.

We've used the close() function (closesocket() on Windows) to disconnect sockets
because of its simplicity. The close() function, however, closes both sides of a
socket. If you use close() in your application, and the remote peer tries to send
more data, it will cause an error. Your system will then transmit a Reset (RST)
message to indicate to the peer that the connection was not closed in an orderly
manner.

If you want to close your sending channel, but still leave the option for receiving
more data, you should use the shutdown() function instead. The shutdown() function
takes two parameters. The first parameter is a socket, and the second is an int
indicating how to shut down the socket.

In theory, shutdown() supports three options—closing the sending side of a
connection, closing the receiving side, and closing both sides. However, the TCP
protocol itself doesn't reflect these options, and it is rarely useful to use shutdown()
for closing the receiving side.

There is a small portability issue about shutdown() functions parameters. Under
windows, you want to call it with SD_SEND. On other systems, you should use
SHUT_WR. Both values are defined as 1, so you can also call it that way.


The code to shutdown the sending channel of a socket in a cross-platform
manner is as follows:
  if (shutdown(my_socket, 1) /* 1 = SHUT_WR, SD_SEND */) {
      fprintf(stderr, "shutdown() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
  }


This use of shutdown() causes the TCP FIN message to be transmitted after the
transmission queued is emptied.
You may wonder, if you're receiving data from a peer, and recv() returns 0, how
you know whether your peer has called shutdown() or close()? Unfortunately, you
can't know, except by prior agreement. If they have used shutdown() only to close
their sending data channel, then they are still receptive to additional data. If they
instead used close(), additional data will trigger an error state.

Although half-closed connections have their uses, it is often easier to use an
application protocol that clearly indicates the end of the transaction. For
example, consider the HTTP protocol covered in Chapter 6, Building a Simple
Web Client. With the HTTP protocol, the client indicates the end of its request
with a blank line. The server knows it has the full request when it sees this blank
line. The server then specifies how much data it will be sending with the Content-
Length header. Once the client has received that much data, it knows that it hasn't
missed anything. The client can then call close() and be confident that the server
won't be sending additional data.

In many applications, knowing whether the shutdown was orderly isn't always
useful. Consider the chat room program (tcp_serve_chat.c) from Chapter 3, An In-
Depth Overview of TCP Connections. This program has no real application
protocol. That program simply sends messages from one client to every other
client. When a client decides to disconnect, it isn't important that it continues to
receive data from the server. Guaranteeing an orderly TCP release would provide
no benefit.

So, when is shutdown() useful? Basically, a TCP orderly release is useful when the
application protocol doesn't have a way to signal that it has finished sending
data, and your application isn't tolerant of missed data. In that case, shutdown() is a
useful signal.

Please note that if you're using threading or forking, there are additional
differences to the behavior of close() versus shutdown() that must be considered.
When shutdown() is called, it always affects the socket. The close() function, by
contrast, has no effect if additional processes also hold handles to the socket.

Finally, note that close() must still eventually be called on a socket closed with
shutdown() in order to release associated system resources.


Another issue that comes up around the TCP tear-down procedure is the long
delay for the side that initiated the close to remain in the TIME-WAIT state. This can
sometimes cause problems for TCP servers. Let's look at that next.
Preventing address-in-use errors
If you do TCP server programming for very long, you will eventually run into
the following scenario—your TCP server has one or more open connections, and
then you terminate it (or it crashes). You restart the server, but the call to bind()
fails with an EADDRINUSE (WSAEADDRINUSE on Windows) error.

When this happens, you can wait a few moments, try it again, and it works.
What's going on here?

Essentially, when an application initiates a TCP socket close (or causes the
disconnection by crashing), that socket goes into the TIME-WAIT state. The
operating system continues to keep track of this socket for some time, potentially
minutes.

An example program, server_noreuse.c, is included in this chapter's code repo. You
can reproduce this address-in-use problem by running it, accepting a connection,
and then terminating server_noreuse. To reproduce the problem, it is vital that the
server is the one to terminate the open connection, not the client.

If you immediately start server_noreuse again, you will see the bind() error.

The following screenshot shows this on a Linux desktop:
You can use the netstat command to see these half-dead connections that are
preventing our server from starting. The following command shows which
connections are stuck in the TIME-WAIT state on Linux:
  netstat -na | grep TIME


As long as one of these connections is hanging on, it prevents any new process
from calling bind() on the same local port and address.

This failure of the bind() call can be prevented by setting the SO_REUSEADDR flag on
the server socket before calling bind().

The following code demonstrates this:
  int yes = 1;
  if (setsockopt(my_socket, SOL_SOCKET, SO_REUSEADDR,
          (void*)&yes, sizeof(yes)) < 0) {
      fprintf(stderr, "setsockopt() failed. (%d)\n", GETSOCKETERRNO());
  }


Once the SO_REUSEADDR flag is set, bind() succeeds even if a few TIME-WAIT
connections are still hanging on to the same local port and address.

An example program, server_reuse.c, is included to demonstrate this technique.
I suggest that you always use SO_REUSEADDR for TCP servers because there are few
downsides. The only real drawback is that using SO_REUSEADDR allows your program
to bind to a specific interface even if another program has already bound to the
wildcard address. Usually, this isn't a problem, but it is something to keep in
mind.

You may sometimes see programs that attempt to fix this issue by killing sockets
in the TIME-WAIT state. This can be accomplished by setting the socket linger
option. This is dangerous! The TIME-WAIT state is essential to TCP's reliability, and
interfering with it can lead to severe problems.

Why is this address-in-use only a problem for servers and not clients? Because
the problem manifests itself when calling bind(). Client programs don't usually
call bind(). If they do, this can also be a problem on the client-side.

While we are still on the topic of disconnected sockets, what happens when you
try to send data to a peer that has already called close()? Let's consider that next.
Sending to a disconnected peer
There are three basic ways a TCP connection can fail. They are as follows:

     A network outage
     The peer application crashes
     The peer's system crashes

A network outage prevents data from reaching your peer. In this case, TCP tries
to retransmit data. If connectivity is re-established, TCP simply picks back up
where it left off. Otherwise, the connection eventually times out. This timeout
can be on the order of 10 minutes.

The second way a TCP connection can fail is if the connected peer application
crashes. In this case, the peer's operating system sends a FIN message. This case
is indistinguishable from the peer calling close() on their end. If your application
continues to send data after having received the FIN message, the peer's system
will send an RST message to indicate an error.

Finally, a connection could fail because the peer's whole system has crashed. In
this case, it won't be able to send a FIN message. This case looks the same as a
network outage, and the TCP connection would eventually timeout. However,
consider what happens if the crashed system reboots before the connection times
out. In that case, the rebooted system will eventually receive a TCP message
from the original connection. The rebooted system will not recognize the TCP
connection and will send an RST message in response to indicate an error
condition.

To reiterate, if you use send() on a socket that your peer thinks is closed, that peer
will respond with an RST message. This state is easily detected by the return
value of recv().

A more serious issue to consider is what happens when send() is called on a
socket that has already received an RST message from its peer. On Unix-based
systems, the default is to send a SIGPIPE signal to your program. If you don't
handle this signal, the operating system will terminate your program.
It is therefore essential for TCP servers to either handle or disable the SIGPIPE
signal. Failure to handle this case means that a rude client could kill your server.

Signals are complicated. If you're already using signals in your program, you
may want to handle SIGPIPE. Otherwise, I recommend you just disable it by
setting the SIGPIPE handler to SIG_IGN.

The following code disables SIGPIPE on Unix-based systems:
  #if !defined(_WIN32)
  #include <signal.h>
  #endif

  #if !defined(_WIN32)
  signal(SIGPIPE, SIG_IGN);
  #endif


As an alternative, you can use MSG_NOSIGNAL with send() as shown in the following
code:
  send(my_socket, buffer, sizeof(buffer), MSG_NOSIGNAL);


If the signal is ignored or MSG_NOSIGNAL is used, send() returns -1 and sets errno to
EPIPE.


On Windows, attempting to call send() on a closed socket generally results in
WSAGetLastError() returning WSAECONNRESET.


An example program, server_crash.c, is included in this chapter's code repository.
This program accepts TCP connections on port 8080. It then waits for the client to
disconnect, and then attempts two sends to that disconnected client. This
program is useful as a tool to explore the return values, error codes, and function
behavior in different scenarios.
Socket's local address
When implementing servers, for both TCP and UDP, it is important to bind the
listening socket to a local address and port. If the socket isn't bound, then clients
can't know where to connect.

It is also possible to use bind() on the client side to associate a socket with a
particular address and port. It is sometimes useful to use bind() in this manner on
machines that have multiple network interfaces. The use of bind() can allow the
selection of which network address to use for the outgoing connection.

Sometimes, bind() is used to set the local port for an outgoing connection. This is
usually a bad idea for a few reasons. First, it very seldom serves any purpose.
The port number presented to the connected server is likely to be different
because of network address translation regardless. Binding to a local port also
invites the error of selecting a port that is already in use. Usually, the operating
system takes care of selecting a free port. This use of bind() also raises the issue
with TIME-WAIT, which would prevent a new connection from being established
after a closed one without a substantial delay.

We have used bind() in this book mostly for binding servers to a particular port
number. It can also be used to associate servers to a particular address. If a server
has multiple network interfaces, it may be the case that you only care to listen on
connections at one address. In this case, bind() can easily be used to limit the
connections to that address. It can also be used to limit connections to the local
machine by binding sockets to 127.0.0.1. This can be an important security
measure for some applications.

We have employed the select() function for many purposes—timing out connect(),
signaling when data is available, and preventing send() from blocking. However,
select() is only suitable for monitoring a limited number of sockets. Let's look at

this limitation, and how to circumvent it, next.
Multiplexing with a large number of
sockets
We've used select() in this book to multiplex between open sockets.
The select() function is great because it is available on many platforms.
However, if you have a large number of open sockets, you can quickly run into
the limitations of select().

There is a maximum number of sockets you can pass to select(). This number is
available through the FD_SETSIZE macro.

This chapter's code repository includes a program, setsize.c, which prints the
value of FD_SETSIZE.

The following screenshot shows this program being compiled and run on
Windows 10:




The preceding screenshot shows FD_SETSIZE is 64 on this system. Although
Windows's default size for FD_SETSIZE is quite low, it is common to see higher
values on other systems. The default value of FD_SETSIZE on Linux is 1024.

On Windows, it is possible to increase FD_SETSIZE easily. You only need to define
FD_SETSIZE yourself before including the winsock2.h header. For example, the
following code increases FD_SETSIZE to 1024 on Windows:
  #ifndef FD_SETSIZE
  #define FD_SETSIZE 1024
  #endif
  #include <winsock2.h>


This works because Winsock uses FD_SETSIZE to build the fd_set type.

On Linux, this trick does not work. Linux defines fd_set as a bitmask, and it is
not possible to increase its size without recompiling the kernel.

There are possible workarounds to effectively cheat select() into accepting
socket descriptors larger than 1023 on Linux. One trick that usually works is to
allocate an array of fd_set variables. Setting a socket is then done like this:
  FD_SET(s % FD_SETSIZE, &set_array[s / FD_SETSIZE])


However, if you have to resort to a hack such as the preceding code, you may be
better off avoiding select() and using a different multiplexing technique. The
poll() function, for example, provides the functionality of select() without a limit

on the number of file descriptors it can handle.
Summary
We covered a lot of ground in this chapter. First, we reviewed error-handling
methods, and then we implemented a function to obtain text descriptions for
error codes.

We then jumped right into the hard details of TCP sockets. We saw how TCP
sockets hide much complexity, and how it is sometimes necessary to understand
that hidden state to get good application performance. We saw a method for an
early timeout on a TCP connect() call, and we looked at how to terminate a
connection with an orderly release.

We then took a closer look at the bind() function and how its usefulness differs
between servers and clients. Finally, we discussed how the select() function
limits the total number of sockets your program can handle, and how to work
around it.

So far, this book has been focused mainly on network code as it would pertain to
personal computers and servers. In the next chapter, Chapter 14, Web
Programming for the Internet of Things, we move our focus to the extending of
internet access to everyday objects—that is, the Internet of Things.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge acquired from this chapter:

 1. Is it ever acceptable to just terminate a program if a network error is
    detected?
 2. Which system functions are used to convert error codes into text
    descriptions?
 3. How long does it take for a call to connect() to complete on a TCP socket?
 4. What happens if you call send() on a disconnected TCP socket?
 5. How can you ensure that the next call to send() won't block?
 6. What happens if both peers to a TCP connection try to send a large amount
    of data simultaneously?
 7. Can you improve application performance by disabling the Nagle
    algorithm?
 8. How many connections can select() handle?

The answers to these questions are found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Web Programming for the Internet of
Things
In this chapter, we turn our attention to the Internet of Things (IoT). The IoT is
an exciting new trend where internet connectivity is added to everyday physical
objects. When combined with embedded electronics and sensors, internet access
allows physical objects to interact with one another and be controlled and
monitored from anywhere in the world.

The following topics are covered in this chapter:

     Defining the IoT
     Connectivity types
     Bandwidth considerations
     Controller types
     Ethics of the IoT
     Security for the IoT
Technical requirements
This chapter contains no C code. Instead, it focuses on the theory, techniques,
and practices used in the IoT domain.
What is the IoT?
We now live in a world where almost anything that can be connected to the
internet, has been. These devices make up the IoT, and they are in every part of
our lives.

In the kitchen at home, devices with internet connectivity include fridges,
microwave ovens, conventional ovens, food scales, dishwashers, coffee-makers,
and even juicers.

Elsewhere in the home, we have smart TVs, gaming consoles, thermostats,
furnaces, washing machines, light switches, light bulbs, yoga mats, alarm clocks,
cameras, doorbells, bathroom scales, baby monitors, sound systems, and
speakers—all connected to the internet. Of course, your whole house may be
supplied with electricity, water, and gas from networked smart meters. When you
leave home, do you go through an IoT garage door to get in your always-
connected car with built-in Wi-Fi? Many do.

In the industrial sector, IoT devices are central to Industry 4.0, commonly
considered the fourth industrial revolution. Using internet connectivity to
interconnect every device in the manufacturing supply chain has allowed for
unprecedented optimizations in efficiency.

The IoT is even affecting the way we grow food. In agriculture, IoT devices
allow farmers to monitor relevant weather conditions, such as temperature,
humidity, sunlight, rainfall, and wind speed. This information informs decisions
improving yield and quality.

Of course, these are just a few examples of IoT applications. The concept is also
applied to concerns in environment, healthcare, infrastructure, transportation,
and more.

When adding internet connectivity to a device, you have several options. There
are certainly pros and cons to each connection option. We review them next.
Connectivity options
Once you've figured out what your device does, and that it benefits from an
internet connection, you still have to decide how to connect it. There are many
options with various trade-offs.
Wi-Fi
Perhaps Wi-Fi needs no introduction. Almost every modern home with internet
access has Wi-Fi available. This is in large part because residential Internet
Service Providers (ISPs) typically use modems with built-in Wi-Fi. If your IoT
device is deployed indoors, there is a good chance that a Wi-Fi network is
available. This is particularly true for residential and commercial devices.

Wi-Fi is the most popular Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
technology and is based around the IEEE 802.11 standards. It typically operates
on either a 2.4 GHZ or a 5 GHZ radio frequency.

Two main operation modes are provided by Wi-Fi. In ad hoc mode, devices
communicate directly to one another. However, infrastructure mode is much
more common. In infrastructure mode, devices on a WLAN all connect to a
Wireless Access Point (WAP). The WAP then generally provides internet
access for the whole WLAN.

Wi-Fi provides good bandwidth, low latency, and basic security features, but it
has higher power needs than other short-range wireless standards. Although
newer versions of Wi-Fi can achieve speeds of 1 Gbps, these are not yet
commonly seen in practice. In any case, for an IoT device application, we are
typically concerned about internet access. The Wi-Fi performance of the IoT
device's connection to the local router is not usually the bottleneck, but rather,
the available internet service to the router is.

One downside to using Wi-Fi connectivity in your IoT device is in the setup
difficulty. Most Wi-Fi networks are secured with a password, and therefore your
device needs to somehow obtain the network name and password before being
able to connect. If your device has a built-in screen and keyboard (or
touchscreen), then entering the network password is trivial.

However, for IoT devices without large screens, getting the network password
configured can sometimes be complicated. One solution is to have your end user
put the configuration information on an SD card or USB storage device. Your
device then reads the password from this storage and can connect to the network.
The problem with this solution is that it is tedious, and many users may not be
technically capable of completing this setup.

An alternative setup is to first connect the device to a computer or smartphone
(perhaps through Bluetooth) for the initial configuration. This has the downside
of requiring the user to obtain such a setup device (not everyone has a
smartphone), as well as requiring extra work in developing the setup application.

A third setup method is to have the IoT device initially provide its own Wi-Fi
network. In other words, the device acts as a temporary access point. The user
then utilizes a laptop or smartphone to connect directly to the device. The user
opens a browser, and the device serves a web page on which the user can
configure the device. Once the parameters are entered, the IoT device connects
to the local Wi-Fi hotspot and is now configured for internet access.

The following diagram illustrates this setup method:




The advantage of this setup method is that no special software needs to be
developed for the setup. Any device that can connect to a Wi-Fi network and has
a standard web browser will work.

Keep in mind that Wi-Fi networks change occasionally. It is good security
practice to change Wi-Fi passwords from time to time, and each time this
happens, the IoT device will need to be reconfigured.

Although Wi-Fi is convenient, if a wired connection is available, it's often easier
and better.
Ethernet
A wired Ethernet connection is ideal for any IoT device, if it's available. Ethernet
provides easy setup and extreme reliability. The newest standards allow for a
bandwidth of 400 Gbps, and its low latency is unrivaled. It is even possible to
provide power over Ethernet in some cases, further simplifying deployment.

The downside to Ethernet connections is, of course, that a physical cable is
required. Many offices already have Ethernet run to each room, and Ethernet-
connected IoT devices work well there. In residential and industrial settings,
however, running new wires can be tedious. Wireless connections are, therefore,
often easier in those settings.

When available, Ethernet setup is easy. Oftentimes, a device only needs to be
plugged in and it's ready to work.

Keep in mind that, with Ethernet, as with Wi-Fi, you're relying on internet access
being available at your IoT device installation site. This internet access is
generally much slower than the Ethernet connection you will have on the local
network. As this internet access is provided by your customer, its quality can
vary greatly.

What if Wi-Fi and Ethernet aren't available? What if your device needs to be
mobile? In those cases, cellular internet access may be your best option.
Cellular
Cellular (mobile networks) can be a great connection option for IoT devices. It is
particularly useful for two reasons. First, cellular service is available nearly
everywhere. This makes cellular ideal for mobile IoT devices. Second, all
network setup can be completed at the time of manufacture. This makes
deployment easy, hassle-free, and can lower ongoing support costs when
compared to other options.

The drawback to cellular connectivity is higher cost. First, the IoT device must
contain a cellular modem. Cellular modems are costlier than Wi-Fi modems and
Ethernet transceivers. In addition, certain testing and certification is required
before a device is allowed on operator networks.

Cellular devices must also pay for access. With Wi-Fi or Ethernet, an IoT device
is assumed to be able to leech off local internet access. With cellular, someone
must pay the bill for each specific device. Usually, it makes sense for the IoT
device manufacturer to provision and maintain service for each device. For
devices requiring low bandwidth, an LTE cellular connection can be maintained
for well under $1.00 (USD) per device per month. Any device that requires
significant bandwidth is much more costly to service.

An additional benefit of cellular is that many mobile network providers can route
your traffic through a Virtual Private Network (VPN). This is done by the
network operator, and you won't be billed for the additional bandwidth of the
VPN overhead. A VPN isolates your IoT devices from the internet and allows
communication only with your trusted servers. It is convenient because many of
your security concerns are taken care of by the cellular provider.

We've covered three options for direct internet access, but many IoT devices
don't need to access the internet directly. Some work in conjunction with a
computer or smartphone for access. One wireless technology commonly used
with this method is Bluetooth.
Bluetooth
Bluetooth is a popular short-range wireless technology standard for use in
Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPAN). Like Wi-Fi, Bluetooth operates on
the 2.4 GHz radio band.

Bluetooth can be used for direct internet access, but this is uncommon in
practice. Bluetooth is usually used to connect an IoT device to another device
that has internet access. For example, many smartwatches use Bluetooth to pair
with smartphones. The smartphone then has internet access through either a Wi-
Fi or cellular connection.

The following diagram shows a Bluetooth smart watch connection:




This works very well for the smart watch, as it is usually expected to be in close
proximity to a smartphone.

Of course, you may object philosophically to the smart watch being considered
an IoT device. In this case, it's more of a sensor for a smartphone app than a
standalone IoT device. Nonetheless, it fits into the ecosystem of the IoT. This
type of piggy-back connectivity can be a good option and should not be
overlooked.

As a similar technology to Bluetooth, IEEE 802.15.4-based wireless networks
are commonly deployed to allow a whole network of IoT devices to
intercommunicate.
IEEE 802.15.4 WPANs
IEEE 802.15.4 is a technical standard for low-rate wireless personal area
networks (LR-WPAN). The standard was first defined in 2003, and it provides
the foundation that other protocols are built on. For example, the Zigbee,
6LoWPAN, Thread, ISA100.1, WirelessHART, WiSUN, and MiFi protocols
are all based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard, just to name a few.

IEEE 802.15.4-based protocols are useful for low-power, limited-range
applications. Typical ranges extend to about 10 meters with a transfer rate of 250
Kbps. Because of the low power requirements, battery-powered devices are
often able to operate for multiple years on a single charge.

Some protocols built on IEEE 802.15.4, such as 6LoWPAN, allow devices to
communicate using IP directly, similar to how Wi-Fi is typically used. Other
protocols are commonly used only to send data to a central hub device. This hub
is then responsible for processing IoT device data and communicating over the
internet, if needed.

As a concrete example, home automation networks are often built on the IEEE
802.15.4 standard. In many cases, these networks are seldom used to provide
direct internet access to each IoT device. Instead, a hub is commonly used to
allow a network of devices to communicate. The hub then coordinates the data
and forwards it on to the internet.

A mesh network topology is common in IEEE 802.15.4-based setups. This
allows devices remote from the hub to communicate through closer devices.

The following diagram illustrates a mesh network for home automation:
In the preceding diagram, we see an IEEE 802.15.4-based network for a home
automation setup. Various IoT devices, such as lights and kitchen gadgets,
communicate with a Coordinator/Hub. This hub controls and coordinates the
connected devices. The hub itself uses Wi-Fi to connect to the local network, and
this internet connection allows for remote control and monitoring of IoT devices.

Now that we've covered a few of the most popular connection options, let's turn
our attention to IoT hardware choices.
Hardware choices
When designing an IoT device, there are many choices for hardware. In many
cases, these choices ultimately must be made based on the functionality of the
device, and not on their connectivity options. Remember, IoT devices need to
have a useful purpose besides just connecting to the internet.

Let's look at three options for hardware—single-board computers,
microcontrollers, and Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs).
Single-board computers
Single-Board Computers (SBCs) are complete computers built on a single
circuit board. They include all the usual pieces of a functional computer—
the Central Processing Unit (CPU), Random Access Memory (RAM), non-
volatile storage, and input/output ports.

SBCs are capable of running full-featured operating systems. Linux is
commonly used.

The Raspberry Pi Zero W, for example, is an SBC measuring just 2.6 by 1.2
inches. It has 512 MB of RAM built-in and uses a micro SD card for storage.
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth connectivity is also included. The Raspberry Pi Zero W
currently retails for about $10 (USD).

The following photo shows a Raspberry Pi Zero W:
Because SBCs run normal desktop operating systems, such as Linux,
programming them is easy. In fact, all of the network programs we've developed
throughout this book are applicable.

In addition to standard computer connectors for video, audio, and USB, SBCs
usually have some General-Purpose Input/Output (GPIO) pins to work with.
This gives them some basic microcontroller-like functionality. These GPIO pins
are capable of reading a digital input signal and providing a digital output signal.
On the Raspberry Pi, some pins are also able to provide Pulse Width
Modulation (PWM) outputs, as well as various board-level serial protocols
—Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C), and
Asynchronous Serial.

Although SBCs are very easy to get started with, they do have a few drawbacks.
They are relatively expensive, they require a lot of power, and their use of
general-purpose operating systems isn't always ideal for embedded systems.
Microcontrollers, by comparison, are much cheaper and optimized to handle
real-time performance constraints.
Microcontrollers
A microcontroller is a small computer contained on a single integrated circuit.
Microcontrollers contain all the parts needed for a functional computer,
including a CPU, RAM, and non-volatile storage.

While SBCs usually have processor speeds in the hundreds or thousands of
MHz, it is common for microcontrollers to be clocked at less than 100 MHz. It's
not uncommon to see microcontrollers clocked at even 1 MHz or less.
Microcontrollers often have RAM varying from between a few dozen bytes to a
few megabytes. These humble specifications also mean that microcontrollers can
get by on very little power. It's not uncommon to see microcontrollers needing
only a few nano-amps when in sleep mode.

Microcontrollers usually come with lots of GPIO pins and useful peripherals,
such as timers, real-time clocks, communication interfaces, Pulse Width
Modulation (PWM) outputs, Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC)
comparators, Digital-to-Analog Converter (DAC), Watch-Dog Timers
(WDT), serial transceivers, and more.

These microcontroller peripherals are often vital to the functioning of an IoT
device core functionality. For example, a PWM generator peripheral can be used
for precise motor control, while an ADC may be needed to read a sensor.
Remember, the internet part of an IoT device is largely secondary; the device
must perform some useful function first. What use is an internet-connected
thermostat if it can't sense the temperature?

Microcontrollers come in various architectures and bus widths. 8-bit, 16-bit, and
32-bit controllers are all common. Although for IoT devices, 8-bit controllers are
probably under-powered.

Modern desktop computers almost always use the Von Neumann architecture,
but many microcontrollers use the Harvard architecture.

In the Von Neumann architecture, which dominates the desktop processor
market, memory stores both data and instructions. This necessitates that
processor instructions are the same width as the data they are processing.
Harvard architecture machines, by contrast, use completely separate memories to
store instructions and data. It is common for Harvard architecture
microcontrollers to use different word sizes for instructions compared to data.
For example, a 16-bit Harvard architecture microcontroller may process data in
16-bit words, but its instructions could be encoded as 24-bit words. While data is
stored in RAM, instructions are read directly from non-volatile memory, such as
FLASH or EEPROM.

It is also possible to find microcontrollers with built-in networking functionality,
including support for Wi-Fi, Ethernet, Bluetooth, IEEE 802.15.4, and others.

As an example, the ESP8266 32-bit microcontroller, produced by Espressif
Systems, comes with Wi-Fi transceiver and TCP/IP stack.

The following diagram shows an ESP8266 microcontroller on a breakout board:




Microcontrollers that don't have built-in transceivers can be connected to
external modems with those capabilities.

Microcontrollers are often programmed directly, without an operating system.
Some programmers prefer operating systems, and many different microcontroller
operating systems are available. These operating systems often make it easier for
a microcontroller to perform various tasks while simplifying program layout and
retaining real-time capabilities. It should be noted that these microcontroller
operating systems generally lack memory segmentation and other safety features
taken for granted in desktop operating systems.

Microcontrollers are great when you don't need much processing power, but do
require real-time processing guarantees. What about when you need both
processing power and real-time guarantees? See FPGAs.
FPGAs
Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) are integrated circuits containing
arrays of programmable logic blocks. These logic blocks can be programmed
and combined to implement complex functions. Essentially, any logic that an
Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) can perform can also be done
on an FPGA.

FPGAs are useful for highly demanding processing tasks requiring real-time
guarantees, especially tasks that benefit from highly-parallel processing. For
example, a video-processing algorithm that is too demanding for a single-board
computer, much less a microcontroller, may be trivial for an FPGA.

FPGAs are programmed using Hardware Description Languages (HDL). The
two most common languages used are Verilog and VHSIC Hardware
Description Language (VHDL). These languages are much different than C.
While C is an imperative language that gives the steps to take to complete a
calculation, HDLs are declarative languages, giving descriptions of how logic
gates should be connected.

In practice, it is common to implement a soft microprocessor core in an FPGA.
This soft processor can then be programmed like any other microprocessor and
is used for sundry tasks that don't require much processing power. For example,
an FPGA that processes video may implement a microprocessor that is
responsible for the setup and configuration functions of the system. These soft
processors are commonly programmed in C.

Regardless of which type of hardware your IoT device uses, if it doesn't have
suitable built-in communication, you will need an external transceiver or
modem.
External transceivers and modems
External transceivers and modems are available for Wi-Fi, cellular, Ethernet,
Bluetooth, and any other protocol you can think of.

The following photo shows an industrial IoT device that uses a cellular modem:
In the preceding diagram, the lower circuit board implements the functionality of
the device (monitoring cryogenic liquids, in this case). On this board, the power
supply system, sensor electronics, and a low-cost, 16-bit microcontroller are
found. A cellular modem is located on the top circuit board, which plugs into a
socket on the lower board.

External modems often communicate with their host (microcontroller) through
asynchronous serial. The protocols used vary considerably among systems.

One common protocol family for communicating with modems is the Hayes
command set also called AT commands. These commands consist of short text-
based messages. AT commands were more or less standardized for placing
phone calls, but have been extended to managing internet connections.
Unfortunately, almost every modem manufacturer does the extension differently.

If you're using an external modem, you need to consult that modem's
documentation for the exact protocol used to communicate with it. Socket-style
drivers are often not available, but many of the core networking concepts
explored in this book still apply.

With connectivity out of the way, let's turn our attention to IoT device protocols.
IoT protocols
Most IoT devices work by sending their data to a few central servers—the cloud.
These servers process and store the IoT device data and allow remote access and
configuration.

For example, take a smart thermostat. It continuously sends temperature data to a
central server. This server stores the data. If a user wants to view the data, they
connect their personal computer or smartphone to that central server. They don't
connect directly to the IoT device itself. When they want to change their
thermostat settings, they send this change to the central server, which then relays
it to the IoT thermostat.

The following diagram illustrates this concept:




In the preceding diagram, note that all communication goes through the server.
There is never direct communication from the smartphone to the IoT device.

Using a central server has several advantages. It allows the IoT device to do
much less processing. The server can further process that data and format it into
graphs and such. The server can also send emails or other alerts, and the server is
able to store much more data than the IoT device is capable of. Furthermore, the
server gives both the IoT device and the user's device (a laptop or smartphone) a
place to connect to. Without a central server, getting the user's device to connect
to the IoT device would be its own challenge.

The actual protocols used by IoT devices vary. Many devices use HTTPS. In
these cases, the device usually requests an HTTPS page while passing collected
data. The web server will then collect the data and return any needed information
to the IoT device.

There are a few protocol standards aimed specifically for IoT devices, such
as Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) and Message Queuing
Telemetry Transport (MQTT).

However, custom designed TCP and UDP protocols are also common. These
custom protocols can achieve a much higher level of efficiency where bandwidth
is a concern.

Perhaps we will see more protocol standardization in the coming years. This
could have an enormous advantage in allowing devices to better interoperate. As
it is now, devices rarely interoperate with devices from different manufacturers.

Another important consideration when deploying an IoT device is how to update
the code after the device is shipped.
Firmware updates
IoT devices are connected to the internet, and this gives us an advantage for
product updates. When new functionality or bug fixes are developed, we can use
the internet to push updates to our IoT devices.

This process is easy when using an SBC. You just push the update as you would
for any software.

If your product uses a microcontroller or FPGA, then things get a bit more
complicated. Your device will need to download a firmware image, and then
transfer that into non-volatile memory as required.

If the device's power is interrupted during the firmware update phase, the device
could be left in an unusable state. This can be prevented through careful design.
If the device has enough memory to store the firmware twice, it is possible to
download the entire firmware update without overwriting the original. In this
case, the device can detect the failed update (by using a checksum, watchdog
timer, or someother mechanism) and revert to the previous state.

In any case, there are a few practices that should be followed by any IoT device
doing remote updates.

First, it is essential for security that any firmware update is authenticated. If this
step is missed, then an attacker could send a fake update to your device. Once
your device is running the attacker's code, nothing else you do for security
matters. We will discuss security in more detail later in this chapter.

Despite the focus on authentication, you should consider allowing your device's
owner to install unauthenticated firmware. It is a basic user freedom to run the
code they want to run on their own devices, and some consider it unethical to
attempt to prevent this. In any case, it is not technically possible to retain control
of a device that's not physically under your control. In other words, if you
attempt to prevent a user from installing their own firmware through Digital
Rights Management (DRM), you should expect your efforts to be eventually
defeated.
It is often considered good practice to allow the device to return to its original
factory configuration. This usually means storing the factory firmware in a
separate non-volatile memory, such as a low-cost flash chip. This is important in
the rare case that a firmware update fails. If a firmware update fails, the device
may be unable to boot. If a redundant firmware copy was stored, then the device
can be rolled back to its original factory state with some sort of physical reset
mechanism. From this state, the update can be retried.

Now that we've covered some technical considerations of IoT design, let's turn
our attention to a few ethical concerns.
Ethics of IoT
Much criticism has been leveled at the IoT concept regarding privacy, security,
and other ethical concerns. This isn't surprising, given these devices' pervasive
presence in our lives.

Most IoT devices work in conjunction with a central server. This server gets
essentially all of the collected data from the IoT devices it services. This raises
questions about data ownership and privacy.
Privacy and data collection
Many IoT devices collect lots of data as part of their operation. For example, a
smart thermostat collects temperature data about its environment. This is
required for it to function. This data may seem harmless at first glance, but once
you consider how people use smart thermostats, you realize that the data is more
important than it first appears.

In the smart thermostat example, people will set different temperatures based on
when they expect to be awake, asleep, or away. From this data, you can infer
approximately at what time someone leaves for work in the morning and what
time they get back. When a person leaves their house for a week-long holiday, it
will be clearly reflected in the data.

If even a seemingly innocuous smart thermostat gives great insight into a
person's behavior, imagine how much more data a smartphone or home assistant
collects!

If we accept that this data collection is inherent to the device's functionality, then
its collection seems justified. Consider, then, if the IoT company has an
obligation to the user to keep their data secure or confidential. Then who owns
this data? Is it owned by the company collecting it, or does the customer who
provides that data own it? The old understanding was that the data was solely the
property of the company collecting it, but there is a recent push to reclassify that.
Legal opinions vary, and this is still mostly uncharted territory.

In any case, if you're collecting data, even seemingly innocuous data, please treat
it with respect. Please also allow your users the freedom to see and download
copies of that data you are storing on them.
End-of-life planning
Another consideration when designing an IoT device is what happens when that
device is no longer being manufactured? Many IoT companies will simply stop
supporting their old devices after a while, and these devices then become
useless. This is because they often require connecting to a central server to
function, and once this central server goes offline, they literally cannot function.

There is an alternative. When designing an IoT device, it is possible to make it
function in a reduced capacity even without internet connectivity. For example, it
is possible to design a smart thermostat to continue working as a manual
thermostat even when it cannot establish a connection to its central server.

When designing your IoT device, please take into consideration if you can keep
it useful even after your company discontinues support for it. In some cases, this
isn't possible, but in many cases, it appears that companies purposely limit their
devices only to spite their customers. Don't be like those companies.
Security
In recent years, a lot of IoT devices have been deployed with little thought given
to security. As companies rush to push devices to market quickly, security too
often doesn't even enter the equation. The situation has gotten so bad that there is
now a common saying: "The S in IoT stands for security."

The security problem may be compounded by the fact that insecure IoT devices
don't often expose the device developers to liability. For example, if you develop
an insecure server, then your company is open to attack. However, if you
develop an insecure IoT device, your company is fine; it's just your customers
who are open to attack.

If you're developing an IoT device, I implore you—do the right thing and think
about security early and often.

According to the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP), the top
ten IoT security problems are as follows:

 1. Weak, guessable, or hardcoded passwords
 2. Insecure network services
 3. Insecure ecosystem interfaces
 4. Lack of secure update mechanism
 5. Use of insecure or outdated components
 6. Insufficient privacy protection
 7. Insecure data transfer and storage
 8. Lack of device management
 9. Insecure default settings
10. Lack of physical hardening

You can find more information from the OWASP Foundation at https://owasp.org/.

Many of the preceding problems are easily addressable simply by caring. For
example, many devices are still shipped with hardcoded passwords or backdoors.
There isn't much to say about this problem from a technical perspective—just
don't ship your products with hardcoded passwords or backdoors.
Some advocate that all IoT devices should use HTTPS to provide a basic level of
security—the so-called Secure Hypertext Internet of Things (SHIoT). See Chap
ter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL, for information

about HTTPS from the client's perspective.

For embedded HTTPS, you may find the OpenSSL library too heavyweight.
Consider using a TLS implementation designed for embedded use. These
embedded-first libraries are also able to take advantage of encryption hardware
built in to common microcontrollers. wolfSSL is one such open-source library.
In addition to TLS for TCP, wolfSSL also supports DTLS for securing UDP-
based protocols.

Using TLS can go a long way to secure an IoT device, but it is not a panacea. In
particular, certificates must be carefully managed. Don't make the mistake of
assuming that encryption is good enough. Encryption only protects against
passive attacks; both encryption and authentication are needed to protect against
active attacks.

Sometimes, minimizing bandwidth is a priority. This is particularly true for
cellular connections. In many use-cases, an IoT device with limited bandwidth
will find TLS and DTLS too heavyweight. Establishing a new TLS or DTLS
connection can take several kilobytes on average.

If your cellular provider is able to tunnel your traffic over a secure VPN, without
metering the VPN overhead, you may be able to forgo implementing secure
communication at the application level. In this case, your device can use TCP or
UDP directly, and the VPN connection ensures that this traffic will never be
visible over the internet. This level of security isn't appropriate for all use-cases,
as your traffic is still visible to your network provider.

In the case that you must secure a protocol yourself, you may take advantage of
the fact that you have control over the manufacturing of your IoT device. It is
possible to assign each device a unique encryption key at the time of
manufacture. This technique is called Pre-Shared Key (PSK). With PSK,
devices can secure their communication using symmetric ciphers, avoiding much
of the overhead required by TLS, DTLS, and other heavyweight solutions. If
doing symmetric encryption, keep in mind that encryption is useless against an
active attacker unless you also implement authentication. This is done using a
Message Authentication Code (MAC).

If you do use PSK, be sure to use a unique key for each individual device.
Reusing the same key is not appropriate.

In any case, it is advisable to run your security scheme by a security professional
before and during implementation. Even a small, nearly insignificant mistake
with encryption or authentication can compromise an entire system.
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at the high-level design of IoT devices. We looked at
different types of hardware that IoT devices can be built on—SBCs,
microcontrollers, and FPGAs. We considered the various ways these devices can
connect to the internet, including wired and wireless connections, and we
weighed some trade-offs associated with each.

We also took into consideration some of the protocol choices that IoT devices
can use and reiterated the importance of security.
Questions
Try these questions to test your knowledge from this chapter:

 1. What are the drawbacks of using Wi-Fi connectivity?
 2. What are the drawbacks of using Ethernet connectivity?
 3. What are the drawbacks of using cellular connectivity?
 4. What are some advantages of using a Single-Board Computer with
    embedded Linux? What are the drawbacks?
 5. What are some advantages of using a microcontroller in your IoT device?
 6. Is the use of HTTPS always appropriate in IoT device communication?

The answers to these questions can be found in Appendix A, Answers to Questions.
Answers to Questions
Chapter 1, Introducing Networks and
Protocols
1. What are the key differences between IPv4 and IPv6?

     IPv4 only supports 4 billion unique addresses, and because they were
     allocated inefficiently, we are now running out. IPv6 supports 3.4 x
     1038 possible addresses. IPv6 provides many other improvements, but
     this is the one that affects our network programming directly.

2. Are the IP addresses given by the ipconfig and ifconfig commands the
   same IP addresses that a remote web server sees if you connect to it?

     Sometimes, these addresses will match, but not always. If you're on a
     private IPv4 network, then your router likely performs network address
     translation. The remote web server then sees the translated address.
     If you have a publicly routable IPv4 or IPv6 address, then the address
     seen by the remote web server will match those reported by ipconfig and
     ifconfig.


3. What is the IPv4 loopback address?

     The IPv4 loopback address is 127.0.0.1, and it allows networked programs
     to communicate with each other while executing on the same machine.

4. What is the IPv6 loopback address?

     The IPv6 loopback address is ::1. It works in the same way as the IPv4
     loopback address.

5. How are domain names (for example, example.com) resolved into IP
   addresses?

     DNS is used to resolve domain names into IP addresses. This protocol is
     covered in detail in Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and DNS.
6. How can you find your public IP address?

     The easiest way is to visit a website that reports it for you.

7. How does an operating system know which application is responsible
   for an incoming packet?

     Each IP packet has a local address, remote address, local port number,
     remote port number, and protocol type. These five attributes are
     memorized by the operating system to determine which application
     should handle any given incoming packet.
Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with
Socket APIs
1. What is a socket?

     A socket is an abstraction that represents one endpoint of a
     communication link between systems.

2. What is a connectionless protocol? What is a connection-oriented
   protocol?

     A connection-oriented protocol sends data packets in the context of a
     larger stream of data. A connectionless protocol sends each packet of
     data independently of any before or after it.

3. Is UDP a connectionless or connection-oriented protocol?

     UDP is considered a connectionless protocol. Each message is sent
     independently of any before or after it.

4. Is TCP a connectionless or connection-oriented protocol?

     TCP is considered a connection-oriented protocol. Data is sent and
     received in order as a stream.

5. What types of applications generally benefit from using the UDP
   protocol?

     UDP applications benefit from better real-time performance while
     sacrificing reliability. They are also able to take advantage of IP
     multicasting.

6. What types of applications generally benefit from using the TCP
   protocol?

     Applications that need a reliable stream of data transfer benefit from the
      TCP protocol.

 7. Does TCP guarantee that data will be transmitted successfully?

      TCP makes some guarantees about reliability, but nothing can truly
      guarantee that data is transmitted successfully. For example, if someone
      unplugs your modem, no protocol can overcome that.

 8. What are some of the main differences between Berkeley sockets and
    Winsock sockets?

      The header files are different. Sockets themselves are represented as
      signed versus unsigned ints. When socket() or accept() calls fail, the return
      values are different. Berkeley sockets are also standard file descriptions.
      This isn't always true with Winsock. Error codes are different and
      retrieved in a different way. There are additional differences, but these
      are the main ones that affect our programs.

 9. What does the bind() function do?

      The bind() function associates a socket with a particular local network
      address and port number. Its usage is almost always required for the
      server, and it's usually not required for the client.

10. What does the accept() function do?

      The accept() function will block until a new TCP client has connected. It
      then returns the socket for this new connection.

11. In a TCP connection, does the client or the server send application data
    first?

      Either the client or the server can send data first. They can even send data
      simultaneously. In practice, many client-server protocols (such as HTTP)
      work by having the client send a request first and then having the server
      send a response.
Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of
TCP Connections
1. How can we tell if the next call to recv() will block?

     We use the select() function to indicate which sockets are ready to be
     read from without blocking.

2. How can you ensure that select() doesn't block for longer than a
   specified time?

     You can pass select() a timeout parameter.

3. When we used our tcp_client program to connect to a web server, why
   did we need to send a blank line before the web server responded?

     HTTP, the web server's protocol, expects a blank line to indicate the end
     of the request. Without this blank line, it wouldn't know if the client was
     going to keep sending additional request headers.

4. Does send() ever block?

     Yes. You can use select() to determine when a socket is ready to be
     written to without blocking. Alternatively, sockets can be put into non-
     blocking mode. See Chapter 13, Socket Programming Tips and Pitfalls, for
     more information.

5. How can we tell if a socket has been disconnected by our peer?

     The return value of recv() can indicate if a socket has been disconnected.

6. Is data received by recv() always the same size as data sent with send()?

     No. TCP is a stream protocol. There is no way to tell if the data returned
     from one recv() call was sent with one or many calls to send().
7. Consider this code:
           recv(socket_peer, buffer, 4096, 0);
           printf(buffer);


         What is wrong with it?
         Also see what is wrong with this code:
           recv(socket_peer, buffer, 4096, 0);
           printf("%s", buffer);


         The data returned by recv() is not null terminated! Both of the
         preceding code excerpts will likely cause printf() to read past the end
         of the data returned by recv(). Additionally, in the first code example
         the data received could contain format specifiers (for example %d),
         which would cause additional memory access violations.
Chapter 4, Establishing UDP
Connections
1. How do sendto() and recvfrom() differ from send() and recv()?

     The send() and recv() functions are useful after calling connect(). They only
     work with the one remote address that was passed to connect(). The
     sendto() and recvfrom() functions can be used with multiple remote

     addresses.

2. Can send() and recv() be used on UDP sockets?

     Yes. The connect() function should be called first in that case. However,
     the sendto() and recvfrom() functions are often more useful for UDP
     sockets.

3. What does connect() do in the case of a UDP socket?

     The connect() function associates the socket with a remote address.

4. What makes multiplexing with UDP easier than with TCP?

     One UDP socket can talk to multiple remote peers. For TCP, one socket
     is needed for each peer.

5. What are the downsides to UDP when compared to TCP?

     UDP does not attempt to fix many of the errors that TCP does. For
     example, TCP ensures that data arrives in the same order it was sent, TCP
     tries to avoid causing network congestion, and TCP attempts to resend
     lost packets. UDP does none of this.

6. Can the same program use UDP and TCP?

     Yes. It just needs to create sockets for both.
Chapter 5, Hostname Resolution and
DNS
1. Which function fills in an address needed for socket programming in a
   portable and protocol-independent way?

     getaddrinfo()   is the function to use for this.

2. Which socket programming function can be used to convert an IP
   address back into a name?

     getnameinfo()   can be used to convert addresses back to names.

3. A DNS query converts a name to an address, and a reverse DNS query
   converts an address back into a name. If you run a DNS query on a
   name, and then a reverse DNS query on the resulting address, do you
   always get back the name you started with?

     Sometimes, you will get the same name back but not always. This is
     because the forward and reverse lookups use independent records. It's
     also possible to have many names point to one address, but that one
     address can only have one record that points back to a single name.

4. What are the DNS record types used to return IPv4 and IPv6 addresses
   for a name?

     The A record type returns an IPv4 address, and the AAAA record type returns
     an IPv6 address.

5. Which DNS record type stores special information about email
   servers?

     The MX record type is used to return email server information.

6. Does getaddrinfo() always return immediately? Or can it block?
     If getaddrinfo() is doing name lookups, it will often block. In the worst-
     case scenario, many UDP messages would need to be sent to various
     DNS servers, so this can be a noticeable delay. This is one reason why
     DNS caching is important.

     If you are simply using getaddrinfo() to convert from a text IP address,
     then it shouldn't block.

7. What happens when a DNS response is too large to fit into a single UDP
   packet?

     The DNS response will have the TC bit set in its header. This indicates
     that the message was truncated. The query should be resent using TCP.
Chapter 6, Building a Simple Web
Client
1. Does HTTP use TCP or UDP?

     HTTP runs over TCP port 80.

2. What types of resources can be sent over HTTP?

     HTTP can be used to transfer essentially any computer file. It's
     commonly used for web pages (HTML) and the associated files (such as
     styles, scripts, fonts, and images).

3. What are the common HTTP request types?

       ,
     GET POST  , and HEAD are the most common HTTP request types.

4. What HTTP request type is typically used to send data from the server
   to the client?

     GETis the usual request type for a client to request a resource from the
     server.

5. What HTTP request type is typically used to send data from the client
   to the server?

     POST   is used when the client needs to send data to the server.

6. What are the two common methods used to determine an HTTP
   response body length?

     The HTTP body length is commonly determined by the Content-Length
     header or by using Transfer-Encoding: chunked.

7. How is the HTTP request body formatted for a POST-type HTTP
   request?
This is determined by the application. The client should set the Content-
Type header to specify which format it is using. application/x-www-form-

urlencoded and application/json are common values.
Chapter 7, Building a Simple Web
Server
1. How does an HTTP client indicate that it has finished sending the
   HTTP request?

     The HTTP request should end with a blank line.

2. How does an HTTP client know what type of content the HTTP server
   is sending?

     The HTTP server should identify the content with a Content-Type header.

3. How can an HTTP server identify a file's media type?

     A common method of identifying a file's media type is just to look at the
     file extension. The server is free to use other methods though. When
     sending dynamic pages or data from a database, there will be no file and
     therefore no file extension. In this case, the server must know the media
     type from its context.

4. How can you tell whether a file exists on the filesystem and is readable
   by your program? Is fopen(filename, "r") != 0 a good test?

     This is not a trivial problem. A robust program will need to consider
     system specific APIs carefully. Windows uses special filenames that will
     trip up a program that relies only on fopen() to check for a file's existence.
Chapter 8, Making Your Program
Send Email
1. What port does SMTP operate on?

     SMTP does mail transmission over TCP port 25. Many providers use
     alternative ports for mail submission.

2. How do you determine which SMTP server receives mail for a given
   domain?

     The mail servers responsible for receiving mail for a given domain are
     given by MX-type DNS records.

3. How do you determine which SMTP server sends mail for a given
   provider?

     It's not possible to determine that in the general case. In any case, several
     servers could be responsible. Sometimes these servers will be listed
     under a TXT-type DNS record using SPF, but that is certainly not
     universal.

4. Why won't an SMTP server relay mail without authentication?

     Open relay SMTP servers are targeted by spammers. SMTP servers
     require authentication to prevent abuse.

5. How are binary files sent as email attachments when SMTP is a text-
   based protocol?

     Binary files must be re-encoded as plain text. The most common method
     is with Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64.
Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web
Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL
1. What port does HTTPS typically operate on?

     HTTPS connects over TCP port 443.

2. How many keys does symmetric encryption use?

     Symmetric encryption uses one key. Data is encrypted and decrypted
     with the same key.

3. How many keys does asymmetric encryption use?

     Asymmetric encryption use two different, but mathematically related,
     keys. Data is encrypted with one and decrypted with the other.

4. Does TLS use symmetric or asymmetric encryption?

     TLS use both symmetric and asymmetric encryption algorithms to
     function.

5. What is the difference between SSL and TLS?

     TLS is the successor to SSL. SSL is now deprecated.

6. What purpose do certificates fulfill?

     Certificates allow a server or client to verify their identity.
Chapter 10, Implementing a Secure
Web Server
1. How does a client decide whether it should trust a server's certificate?

     There are various ways a client can trust a server's certificate. The chain-
     of-trust model is the most common. In this model, the client explicitly
     trusts an authority. The client then implicitly trusts any certificates it
     encounters that are signed by this trusted authority.

2. What is the main issue with self-signed certificates?

     Self-signed certificates aren't signed by a trusted certificate authority.
     Web browsers won't know to trust self-signed certificates unless the user
     adds a special exception.

3. What can cause SSL_accept() to fail?

     SSL_accept()fails if the client doesn't trust the server's certificate or if the
     client and server can't agree on a mutually supported protocol version
     and cipher suite.

4. Can select() be used to multiplex connections for HTTPS servers?

     Yes, but be aware that select() works on the underlying TCP connection
     layer, not on the TLS layer. Therefore, when select() indicates that a
     socket has data waiting, it does not necessarily mean that there is new
     TLS data ready.
Chapter 11, Establishing SSH
Connections with libssh
1. What is a significant downside of using Telnet?

     Essentially, Telnet provides no security features. Passwords are sent as
     plaintext.

2. Which port does SSH typically run on?

     SSH's official port is TCP port 22. In practice, it is common to run SSH
     on arbitrary ports in an attempt to hide from attackers. With a properly
     secured server, these attackers are a nuisance rather than a legitimate
     threat.

3. Why is it essential that the client authenticates the SSH server?

     If the client doesn't verify the SSH server's identity, then it could be
     tricked into sending credentials to an impostor.

4. How is the server typically authenticated?

     SSH servers typically use certificates to identity themselves. This is
     similar to how servers are authenticated when using HTTPS.

5. How is the SSH client typically authenticated?

     It is still common for clients to authenticate with a password. The
     downside to this method is that if a client is somehow tricked into
     connecting to an impostor server, then their password will be
     compromised. SSH provides alternate methods, including authenticating
     clients using certificates, that aren't susceptible to replay attacks.
Chapter 12, Network Monitoring and
Security
1. Which tool would you use to test the reachability of a target system?

     The ping tool is useful to test reachability.

2. Which tool lists the routers to a destination system?

     The traceroute (tracert on Windows) tool will show the network path to a
     target system.

3. What are raw sockets used for?

     Raw sockets allow the programmer to specify directly what goes into a
     network packet. They provide lower-level access than TCP and UDP
     sockets, and can be used to implement additional protocols, such as
     ICMP.

4. Which tools list the open TCP sockets on your system?

     The netstat tool can be used to show open connections on your local
     system.

5. What is one of the biggest concerns with security for networked C
   programs?

     When programming networked applications in C, special care must be
     given to memory safety. Even a small mistake could allow an attacker to
     compromise your program.
Chapter 13, Socket Programming
Tips and Pitfalls
1. Is it ever acceptable just to terminate a program if a network error is
   detected?

     Yes. For some applications terminating on error is the right call. For more
     substantial applications, the ability to retry and continue on may be
     needed.

2. Which system functions are used to convert error codes into text
   descriptions?

     You can use FormatMessage() on Windows and strerror() on other platforms
     to obtain error messages.

3. How long does it take for a call to connect() to complete on a TCP
   socket?

     A call to connect() typically blocks for at least one network time round
     trip while the TCP three-way handshake is being completed.

4. What happens if you call send() on a disconnected TCP socket?

     On Unix-based systems, your program can receive a SIGPIPE signal. It is
     important to plan for that. Otherwise, send() returns -1.

5. How can you ensure that the next call to send() won't block?

     Either use select() to make sure the socket is ready for more data or use
     non-blocking sockets.

6. What happens if both peers to a TCP connection try to send a large
   amount of data simultaneously?

     If both sides to a TCP connection are calling send(), but not recv(), then
     they can be trapped in a deadlocked state. It is important to intersperse
     calls to send() with calls to recv(). The use of select() can help inform your
     program about what to do next.

7. Can you improve application performance by disabling the Nagle
   algorithm?

     It depends on what your application is doing. For real-time applications
     using TCP, disabling the Nagle algorithm is often a good trade-off for
     decreasing latency at the expense of bandwidth efficiency. For other
     applications, disabling it can decrease throughput, increase network
     congestion, and even increase latency.

8. How many connections can select() handle?

     It depends on your platform. It is defined in the FD_SETSIZE macro, which is
     easily increased on Windows but not on other platforms. Typically, the
     upper limit is around 1,024 sockets.
Chapter 14, Web Programming for
the Internet of Things
1. What are the drawbacks to using Wi-Fi connectivity?

     Wi-Fi can be difficult for end user setup. It's also not available
     everywhere.

2. What are the drawbacks to using Ethernet connectivity?

     Many devices aren't used in areas where wiring has been run.

3. What are the drawbacks to using cellular connectivity?

     Cellular connectivity is expensive. It can also have increased latency and
     larger power requirements when compared to other methods.

4. What are some advantages to using a single-board computer with
   embedded Linux? What are the drawbacks?

     Having access to a full operating system, such as Linux, can simplify
     software development. However, Single-Board Computers (SBCs) are
     relatively expensive and offer few board-level connectivity options and
     peripherals when compared to microcontrollers. They also require lots of
     power, relatively speaking.

5. What are some advantages to using a microcontroller in your IoT
   device?

     Many IoT devices will need to use a microcontroller to provide their
     basic functionality anyway. Microcontrollers are cheap, offer a wide
     range of peripherals, are able to meet real-time performance constraints,
     and can run on very little power.

6. Is the use of HTTPS always appropriate in IoT device communication?
HTTPS is a decent way to secure IoT communication for most
applications; however, it has a lot of processing and bandwidth overhead.
Each application is unique, and the security scheme used should be
chosen based on your exact needs.
Setting Up Your C Compiler on
Windows
Microsoft Windows is one of the most popular desktop operating systems.

Before beginning, I highly recommend that you install 7-Zip from https://www.7-z
ip.org/. 7-Zip will allow you to extract the various compression archive formats

that library source code is distributed in.

Let's continue and get MinGW, OpenSSL, and libssh set up on Windows 10.
Installing MinGW GCC
MinGW is a port of GCC to Windows. It is the compiler we recommend for this
book.

You can obtain MinGW from http://www.mingw.org/. Find the download link on that
page and download and run the MinGW Installation Manager (mingw-get).

The MinGW Installation Manager is a GUI tool for installing MinGW. It's
shown in the following screenshot:
Click Install. Then, click Continue. Wait while some files download, and then
click Continue once again.

At this point, the tool will give you a list of packages that you can install. You
need to mark mingw32-base-bin, msys-base-bin, and mingw32-gcc-g++-bin for
installation. This is shown in the following screenshot:




You will also want to select the mingw32-libz-dev package. It is listed under the
MinGW Libraries section. The following screenshot shows this selection:
The g++ and libz packages we've selected are required for building libssh later.

When you're ready to proceed, click Installation from the menu and select Apply
Changes.

A new dialog will show the changes to be made. The following screenshot shows
what this dialog may look like:
Click the Apply button to download and install the packages. Once the
installation is complete, you can close the MinGW Installation Manager.

To be able to use MinGW from the command line easily, you will need to add
MinGW to your PATH.

The steps for adding MinGW to your PATH are as follows:

 1. Open the System control panel (Windows key + Pause/Break).
 2. Select Advanced system settings:
3. From the System Properties window, navigate to the Advanced tab and
   click the Environment Variables... button:
4. From this screen, find the PATH variable under System variables. Select it and
   press Edit....
5. Click New and type in the MinGW path—C:\mingw\bin, as shown in the
   following screenshot:
 6. Click OK to save your changes.

Once MinGW has been added to your PATH, you can open a new command
window and enter gcc --version to ensure that gcc has been installed correctly. This
is shown in the following screenshot:
Installing Git
You will need to have the git version control software installed to download this
book's code.

git is available from https://git-scm.com/download. A handy GUI-based installer is
provided, and you shouldn't have any issues getting it working. When installing,
be sure to check the option for adding git to your PATH. This is shown in the
following screenshot:




After git has finished installing, you can test it by opening a new command
window and entering git --version:
Installing OpenSSL
The OpenSSL library can be tricky to get going on Windows.

If you are brave, you can obtain the OpenSSL library source code directly from h
ttps://www.openssl.org/source/. You will, of course, need to build OpenSSL before it

can be used. Building OpenSSL is not easy, but instructions are provided in
the INSTALL and NOTES.WIN files included with the OpenSSL source code.

An easier alternative is to install prebuilt OpenSSL binaries. You can find a list
of prebuilt OpenSSL binaries from the OpenSSL wiki at https://wiki.openssl.org/in
dex.php/Binaries. You will need to locate binaries that match your operating system

and compiler. Installing them will be a matter of copying the relevant files to the
MinGW include, lib, and bin directories.

The following screenshot shows a binary OpenSSL distribution. The include and
lib folders should be copied over to c:\mingw\ and merged with the existing
folders, while openssl.exe and the two DLL files need to be placed in c:\mingw\bin\:
You can try building openssl_version.c from Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages
with HTTPS and OpenSSL, to test that everything is installed correctly. It should
look like the following:
Installing libssh
You can obtain the latest libssh library from https://www.libssh.org/. If you are
proficient in installing C libraries, feel free to give it a go. Otherwise, read on for
step-by-step instructions.

Before beginning, be sure that you've first installed the OpenSSL libraries
successfully. These are required by the libssh library.

We will need CMake installed in order to build libssh. You can obtain CMake
from https://cmake.org/. They provide a nice GUI installer, and you shouldn't run
into any difficulties. Make sure you select the option to add CMake to your PATH
during installation:
Once you have the CMake tool and the OpenSSL libraries installed, navigate to
the libssh website to download the libssh source code. At the time of writing,
Version 0.8.7 is the latest, and it is available from https://www.libssh.org/files/0.8/.
Download and extract the libssh source code.

Take a look at the included INSTALL file.

Now, open a command window in the libssh source code directory. Create a new
build folder with the following commands:


  mkdir build
  cd build


Keep this command window open. We'll do the build here in a minute.

Start CMake 3.14.3 (cmake-gui) from the start menu or desktop shortcut.

You need to set the source code and build locations using the Browse Source...
and Browse Build... buttons. This is shown in the following screenshot:
Then, click Configure.

On the next screen, select MinGW Makefiles as the generator for this project.
Click Finish.
It may take a moment to process.

From the configuration options, make the following changes:

 1. Uncheck WITH_NACL
 2. Uncheck WITH_GSSAPI
 3. Change CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX to c:\mingw

Then, click Configure again. It will take a moment. If everything worked, click
Generate.

You should now be able to build libssh.

Go back to your command window in the build directory. Use the following
command to complete the build:
  mingw32-make


After the build completes, use the following command to copy the files over to
your MinGW installation:
  mingw32-make install
You can try building ssh_version.c from Chapter 11, Establishing SSH Connections
with libssh, to test that everything is installed correctly. It should look like the
following:
Alternatives
In this book, we recommend free software whenever possible. This is important
for user freedom, and this is one reason we recommend GCC throughout the
book.

In addition, to MinGW GCC, the Clang C compiler is also open source and
excellent quality. The code in this book was also tested to run successfully using
Clang on Windows.

Command-line tools such as GCC and Clang are often easier to integrate into the
complicated workflows required for larger projects. These open source tools also
provide better standards compliance than Microsoft's compilers.

That said, the code in this book also works with Microsoft's compilers. The code
was tested for both Microsoft Visual Studio 2015 and Microsoft Visual Studio
2017.
Setting Up Your C Compiler on Linux
Linux is an excellent choice for C programming. It has arguably the easiest
setup and the best support for C programming out of the three operating systems
covered in this book.

Using Linux also allows you to take the ethical high road and feel good about
supporting free software.

One issue with describing the setup for Linux is that there are many Linux
distributions with different software. In this appendix, we will provide the
commands needed to set up on systems using the apt package manager, such as
Debian Linux and Ubuntu Linux. If you are using a different Linux
distribution, you will need to find the commands relevant to your system. Refer
to your distribution's documentation for help.

Before diving right in, take a moment to make sure your package list is up to
date. This is done with the following command:
  sudo apt-get update


With apt ready to go, setup is easy. Let's get started.
Installing GCC
The first step is to get the C compiler, gcc, installed.

Assuming your system uses apt as its package manager, try the following
commands to install gcc and prepare your system for C programming:
  sudo apt-get install build-essential


Once the install command completes, you should be able to run the following
command to find the version of gcc that was installed:
  gcc --version
Installing Git
You will need to have the Git version control software installed to download this
book's code.

Assuming your system uses the apt package manager, you can install Git with the
following command:
  sudo apt-get install git


Check whether Git has installed successfully by means of the following
command:
  git --version
Installing OpenSSL
OpenSSL can be tricky. You can try your distribution's package manager with
the following commands:
  sudo apt-get install openssl libssl-dev


The problem is that your distribution may have an old version of OpenSSL. If
that is the case, you should obtain the OpenSSL libraries directly from https://www
.openssl.org/source/. You will, of course, need to build OpenSSL before it can be
used. Building OpenSSL is not easy, but instructions are provided in the INSTALL
file included with the OpenSSL source code. Note that its build system requires
that you have Perl installed.
Installing libssh
You can try installing libssh from your package manager with the following
command:
  sudo apt-get install libssh-dev


The problem is that the code in this book is not compatible with older versions
of libssh. Therefore, I recommend you build libssh yourself.

You can obtain the latest libssh library from https://www.libssh.org/. If you are
proficient in installing C libraries, feel free to give it a go. Otherwise, read on for
the step-by-step instructions.

Before beginning, be sure that you've first installed the OpenSSL libraries
successfully. These are required by the libssh library.

We will also need CMake installed in order to build libssh. You can obtain
CMake from https://cmake.org/. You can also get it from your distro's packaging
tool with the following command:
  sudo apt-get install cmake


Finally, the zlib library is also required by libssh. You can install the zlib library
using this command:
  sudo apt-get install zlib1g-dev


Once you have CMake, the zlib library, and the OpenSSL library installed, locate
the version of libssh you would like from https://www.libssh.org/. Version 0.8.7 is
the latest at the time of writing. You can download and extract the libssh source
code with the following commands:
   wget https://www.libssh.org/files/0.8/libssh-0.8.7.tar.xz
   tar xvf libssh-0.8.7.tar.xz
   cd libssh-0.8.7


I recommend that you take a look at the installation instructions included with
libssh. You can use less to view them. Press the Q key to quit less:
  less INSTALL


Once you've familiarized yourself with the build instructions, you can try
building libssh with these commands:
  mkdir build
  cd build
  cmake ..
  make


The final step is to install the library with the following command:
  sudo make install
Setting Up Your C Compiler on
macOS
macOS can be a good development environment for a C programmer. Let's get
started.
Installing Homebrew and the C
compiler
Setup on macOS will be simplified greatly if we use the Homebrew package
manager.

The Homebrew package manager makes installing a C compiler and
development libraries much easier than it would otherwise be.

To install Homebrew, navigate your web browser to https://brew.sh/:
The website gives the command to install Homebrew. You will need to open a
new Terminal window and paste in the command:
Just follow the instructions until Homebrew has finished installing.

Installing Homebrew will also cause the Xcode command-line tools to install.
This means you'll have a C compiler ready to go. Test that you have a working C
compiler with the gcc --version command:
Note that macOS installs the Clang compiler, but aliases it as GCC. In any case,
it will work fine for our purposes.

Git should also have been installed. You can verify this with git --version:
Installing OpenSSL
Assuming you already have Homebrew installed, installing OpenSSL is easy.

Open a new Terminal window and use the following command to install the
OpenSSL library:
  brew install openssl@1.1


At the time of writing, the default Homebrew openssl package is outdated,
therefore we'll use the openssl@1.1 package instead.

The following screenshot shows Homebrew installing the openssl@1.1 package:
Be sure to read any output from brew.

The method suggested by the brew command has you pass -L and -I to the
compiler to tell it where to locate the OpenSSL libraries. This is tedious.

You may prefer to symlink the installed library files to the /usr/local path so that
your compiler can find them automatically. Whether you want to do this or not is
up to you.

If you want to create symlinks so the compiler can find OpenSSL, try the
following commands:
  cd /usr/local/include
  ln -s ../opt/openssl@1.1/include/openssl .
  cd /usr/local/lib
  for i in ../opt/openssl@1.1/lib/lib*; do ln -vs $i .; done


This is shown in the following screenshot:




You can try building openssl_version.c from Chapter 9, Loading Secure Web Pages
with HTTPS and OpenSSL, to test that everything is installed correctly. It should
look like the following:
Installing libssh
With Homebrew installed, installing libssh is also very easy.

Open a new Terminal window and use the following command to install the
OpenSSL library:
  brew install libssh


This is shown in the following screenshot:




This time, we don't need to mess with any other options. You can start using
libssh right away.


You can try building ssh_version.c from Chapter 11, Establishing SSH Connections
with libssh, to test that everything is installed correctly. It should look like the
following:




That concludes the setup for macOS.
Example Programs
This book's code repository, located at https://github.com/codeplea/hands-on-network-pr
ogramming-with-c, includes 44 example programs. These programs are explained in

detail throughout the book.
Code license
The example programs provided in this book's code repository are released
under the MIT license, the text of which follows:
  Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
  a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
  "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without
  limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute,
  sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to
  whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following
  conditions:

  The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
  in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

  THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS
  OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
  FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
  AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
  LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
  FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
  DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
Code included with this book
The following is a list of the 44 example programs included with this book, by
chapter.
Chapter 1 – Introducing Networks
and Protocols
This chapter includes the following example programs:

    win_init.c: Example code to initialize Winsock (Windows only)
    win_list.c: Lists all local IP addresses (Windows only)
    unix_list.c: Lists all local IP addresses (Linux and macOS only)
Chapter 2 – Getting to Grips with
Socket APIs
This chapter includes the following example programs:

    sock_init.c: Example program to include all necessary headers and initialize
    time_console.c: Prints the current date and time to the console
    time_server.c: Serves a web page giving the current date and time
    time_server_ipv6.c: The same as the preceding code but listens for IPv6
    connections
    time_server_dual.c: The same as the preceding code but listens for IPv6/IPv4
    dual-stack connections
Chapter 3 – An In-Depth Overview of
TCP Connections
This chapter includes the following example programs:

               : Establishes a TCP connection and sends/receives data from the
    tcp_client.c
    console.
                      : A TCP server servicing multiple connections
    tcp_serve_toupper.c
    using select(). Echoes received data back to the client all in uppercase.

                           : The same as the preceding code but
    tcp_serve_toupper_fork.c
    uses fork() instead of select(). (Linux and macOS only.)
    tcp_serve_chat.c: A TCP server that relays received data to every other
    connected client.
Chapter 4 – Establishing UDP
Connections
This chapter includes the following example programs:

    udp_client.c: Sends/receives UDP data from the console
    udp_recvfrom.c: Uses recvfrom() to receive one UDP datagram
    udp_sendto.c: Uses sendto() to send one UDP datagram
    udp_serve_toupper.c: Listens for UDP data and echoes it back to the sender all
    in uppercase
    udp_serve_toupper_simple.c: The same as the preceding code but doesn't
    use select()
Chapter 5 – Hostname Resolution
and DNS
This chapter includes the following example programs:

    lookup.c: Uses getaddrinfo() to look up addresses for a given hostname
    dns_query.c: Encodes and sends a UDP DNS query, then listens for and
    decodes the response
Chapter 6 – Building a Simple Web
Client
This chapter includes the following example program:

            : A minimal HTTP client to download a web resource from a given
    web_get.c
    URL
Chapter 7 – Building a Simple Web
Server
This chapter includes the following example programs:

    web_server.c: A minimal web server capable of serving a static website
    web_server2.c: A minimal web server (no globals)
Chapter 8 – Making Your Program
Send Email
This chapter includes the following example program:

              : A simple program to transmit an email
    smtp_send.c
Chapter 9 – Loading Secure Web
Pages with HTTPS and OpenSSL
The examples in this chapter use OpenSSL. Be sure to link to the OpenSSL
libraries when compiling (-lssl -lcrypto):

    openssl_version.c: A program to report the installed OpenSSL version
    https_simple.c: A minimal program that requests a web page using HTTPS
    https_get.c: The HTTP client of Chapter 6, Building a Simple Web Client,
    modified to use HTTPS
    tls_client.c: The TCP client program of Chapter 3, An In-Depth Overview of
    TCP Connections, modified to use TLS
    tls_get_cert.c: Prints a certificate from a TLS server
Chapter 10 – Implementing a Secure
Web Server
The examples in this chapter use OpenSSL. Be sure to link to the OpenSSL
libraries when compiling (-lssl -lcrypto):

    tls_time_server.c: The time server of Chapter 2, Getting to Grips with Socket
    APIs, modified to use HTTPS
    https_server.c: The web server of Chapter 7, Building a Simple Web Server,
    modified to use HTTPS
Chapter 11 – Establishing SSH
Connections with libssh
The examples in this chapter use libssh. Be sure to link to the libssh libraries
when compiling (-lssh):

     ssh_version.c: A program to report the libssh version
     ssh_connect.c: A minimal client that establishes an SSH connection
     ssh_auth.c: A client that attempts SSH client authentication using a password
     ssh_command.c: A client that executes a single remote command over SSH
     ssh_download.c: A client that downloads a file over SSH/SCP
Chapter 12 – Network Monitoring
and Security
This chapter doesn't include any example programs.
Chapter 13 – Socket Programming
Tips and Pitfalls
This chapter includes the following example programs:

    connect_timeout.c: Shows how to time out a connect() call early.
    connect_blocking.c: For comparison with connect_timeout.c.
    server_reuse.c: Demonstrates the use of SO_REUSEADDR.
    server_noreuse.c: For comparison with server_reuse.c.
    server_crash.c: This server purposefully writes to a TCP socket after the
    client disconnects.
    error_text.c: Shows how to obtain error code descriptions.
    big_send.c: A TCP client that sends lots of data after connecting. Used to
    show the blocking behavior of send().
    server_ignore.c: A TCP server that accepts connections, then simply ignores
    them. Used to show the blocking behavior of send().
    setsize.c: Shows the maximum number of sockets select() can handle.
Chapter 14 – Web Programming for
the Internet of Things
This chapter doesn't include any example programs.
Other Book You May Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in another book by Packt:




C Programming Cookbook
B.M. Harwani

ISBN: 9781789617450

    Manipulate single and multi-dimensional arrays
    Perform complex operations on strings
    Understand how to use pointers and memory optimally
    Discover how to use arrays, functions, and strings to make large
    applications
    Implement multitasking using threads and process synchronization
    Establish communication between two or more processes using different
    techniques
    Store simple text in files and store data in a database
Leave a review - let other readers
know what you think
Please share your thoughts on this book with others by leaving a review on the
site that you bought it from. If you purchased the book from Amazon, please
leave us an honest review on this book's Amazon page. This is vital so that other
potential readers can see and use your unbiased opinion to make purchasing
decisions, we can understand what our customers think about our products, and
our authors can see your feedback on the title that they have worked with Packt
to create. It will only take a few minutes of your time, but is valuable to other
potential customers, our authors, and Packt. Thank you!
